The Project Gutenberg eBook of The clammer, by William John Hopkins

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The clammer

Author: William John Hopkins

Release Date: March 28, 2023 [eBook #70399]

Language: English

Produced by: Steve Mattern, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CLAMMER ***





THE CLAMMER




  THE CLAMMER

  BY

  WILLIAM JOHN HOPKINS

  [Illustration]

  BOSTON AND NEW YORK
  HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN & COMPANY
  The Riverside Press, Cambridge
  1906




  COPYRIGHT 1906 BY WILLIAM JOHN HOPKINS
  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

  _Published March, 1906_




CONTENTS


  I

  THE CLAMMER                   1


  II

  A DAUGHTER OF THE RICH       83


  III

  OLD GOODWIN’S WIFE          177




I

THE CLAMMER




THE CLAMMER


Many of my friends--and probably all my neighbors--think me erratic and
peculiar, I do not doubt. My friends remonstrate with me mildly, and
I usually listen and accept and make no reply. For how can they know?
And, they being what they are, how can I help them to a knowledge of
things which must be born in a man? My neighbors do not remonstrate,
for my neighbors are not of necessity my friends, and I am queer enough
not to care to cultivate a man’s acquaintance merely because he lives
next me.

There is Goodwin the Rich, who has the palace on the hill, above my
favorite clam beds. It is not likely that I shall ever know him,
although his automobiles flash past my front gate, covering my hedge
with dust, and enveloping my house in nauseous smells. I do not like
automobiles. It is not to be imagined that Goodwin finds me peculiar,
for he is probably unaware of my existence; but I have some humbler
neighbors who stare at me and shake their heads. And I smile and pass
on; for I know what I know, and it passeth their understanding. And all
this shaking of heads, and all the protesting of my friends, is because
I choose to go clamming.

Some of my friends may, at first, have had the idea that my interest
in clams was biological; for I received some training in that branch
of science, and even taught it--or was supposed to teach it, with
other branches--in a school. But I look back upon that school with
horror, as, no doubt, my victims regard me, in retrospect. And my
neighbors may, very naturally, have assumed that my interest in clams
was gastronomic, which is, indeed, nearer the truth. But the evidence
on that point was inconclusive. They were not asked to my feasts of
steamed clams, if I had any, and they came to look upon me as simply
queer.

As an occupation for leisure hours, I commend the pursuit of the clam.
Your true clammer is of another age, born after his time. He values
not at all the improvements of this age. He reads by candle light or
goes to bed at dark. He loves the wandering along the bare shores, hoe
in hand, the wading through shallows, the mud pies he may make in the
incidental pursuit of his prey, and the sights he sees. For the capture
of the clams is less than the search for them, even as the sport of the
true fisherman lies as much in fishing as in catching fish.

So it befell that I wandered, one afternoon, toward my chosen hunting
ground over the oozy flats. The sun was low in the west, and he spread
the still water and the shining mud with all manner of reds and purples
and shimmering greens. If I might regulate the matter, low tide should
always fall at sunset or at dawn. Either is a fitting time, with the
old earth at peace and its waters stilled or just waking. And at either
time I may satisfy my soul with the unapproachable coloring of the
Great Painter. The hot noon is no time for clamming. Then the water
glares in your eyes, the sun beats down upon your back. The mud is just
mud that stinketh in the nostrils. But when I have the happiness to go
clamming at sunset, I am wont to stand and gaze and muse, forgetting my
errand until I am sunken to my ankles in the mud. Then is my regret for
my scientific training the keenest, and I know, within my soul, that
in the making of a mediocre scientist a good painter has been lost to
the world. Strive against it as I may, I cannot see a sunset without
converting it into its elements of refraction, with a question of
polarization; nor the colors on the muddy puddle under my feet without
thoughts of interference. But I am improving, and I hope, in time, to
have shaken off all the dry dust of science I was at such pains to
acquire. So, that afternoon, I wended on with joy in my heart. For I
would dig, or gaze, as the fancy seized me, until the sun was gone and
the night was fallen.

Now, that particular piece of flat, to which incline alike my heart and
my feet, is my own. I bought the few feet of shore to which the clam
beds are attached because I loved it and feared lest, otherwise, the
march of progress should take it from me. For Goodwin the Rich lives
here, and he is improving the shore--his Water Front. But he shall not
improve away my clams. He may dig here and fill there and build his
walls, but he shall leave mine untouched. For it is mine, as witnesseth
a certain deed recorded with the Register. And as I thought these
thoughts, walking over my sand,--there is more sand than mud here,
which is perhaps why I like it,--as I thought on these things, anger
surged within me and I stamped my foot. And, behold, a little jet of
water spurted up beside it.

“Oho,” said I, “so there you are.”

And straightway I stopped and set down my basket and began to dig;
but leisurely, and with my face to the west, for I would bid the sun
good-night. And that clam was found, and his fellows, and my basket was
half full, and I rose to see the sun. And as I stood and saw him, his
red disk was half down behind the hill, and I could see it sink. So I
raised my hand to salute him, and there came a sweet voice behind me.

“Man,” said the sweet voice, “why are you digging there?”

Now I was surprised to hear that voice, but most surprised at its
sweetness. But yet I would not turn nor answer until the red sun had
winked his last. For, I thought, here is one of the maids from the
house of Goodwin the Rich--or perhaps the governess; yes, surely,
the governess. The truly Rich may insist upon sweet voices in their
governesses. And at last I turned and saw the governess sitting upon
the bank, just where the sod broke off to the sand. And the light from
the western sky shone upon her, the light from the sky that was all
yellows and reds and would soon be turned to violet and green. And as
she sat there, in her plain black dress, with that light shining upon
her, she seemed very beautiful. Truly, thought I, the Rich may have
what they will. But I could not have told what was the color of her
hair. In that light it was red and gold. And I stammered in my speech.

“Your pardon, madam,” I said. “I was saying good-night to the old sun.”

She smiled, a smile as sweet as her voice, but with a touch of sadness
in it. The life of a governess to the Rich is not all a path of roses.

“Yes,” she said. “I came down to see the sun set, too. But why are you
digging?”

“I was digging clams,” I answered gently. For I felt a sorrow for her
sadness.

“Oh,” she said, “do you dig clams? Have you some clams in your basket?
I should like to see some clams.”

Now, truly, that was an easy matter, that she should see some clams,
for there they were in the basket. And the sun was gone, so I lost
none of his company if I would please the governess. It did, indeed,
strike me as strange that a governess should know so little of clams,
but probably she did not teach biology. Governesses to the Rich
deal more in appearance and in manners. Still, I hold that in some
respects the manners of a clam are worthy of imitation. He is quiet and
unobtrusive. I waded out into the water and soused my basket well. Then
I brought it to the governess sitting on the bank.

“Now,” she said, a trifle of petulance showing in the sweet voice, “you
have got them all wet.”

“Better all wet than all muddy,” I replied, standing before her, and
watching the play of light upon her hair. When I see her hair in the
plain light of day, I think I shall find it red,--a brilliant red. But
it was wonderful. Her head was bent as she looked into my basket, and
my opportunity for observation was excellent. One thing my scientific
training has done for me is to make me a good observer.

“Oh,” cried the governess, “what is that funny-looking thing they are
sticking out? Is it the head?”

“It is called the head,” I answered, “but it is not. Isn’t it strange
how often a thing is not what it is called? But I suppose you do not
have to teach anything about clams.”

“Teach about clams!” she said, puzzled for an instant. Then she seemed
to be amused. “No, I don’t. It’s lucky, isn’t it? For I don’t know
anything about them. May I take one of them?”

“It will drip on your dress and spot it,” I said warningly.

“It doesn’t matter,” she replied. And she took a clam in her hand, and
the water dripped upon her dress, as I had said, and it made a spot.
She could not see it then, but I knew how it would look in the morning.
She was a most careless, heedless governess.

“Of course it matters,” I said, reproving. “You will see. Surely they
don’t give you all the gowns you want, to spot with salt water.”

She was puzzled again. “All the gowns I want?” she asked, wondering.
“What do you mean?”

“Up at the great house,” I said, “at Good--Mr. Goodwin’s.”

The governess smiled, a merry smile that filled her eyes with light.
For she was looking up at me then. And I looked deep into those eyes
until her face was the color of her hair.

“Oh, yes,” she said, looking down,--and I was sorry, for on a sudden
it seemed dark,--“oh, yes, they are very good to me--in the matter of
gowns. But I will be careful if you think I ought.”

“I know you ought,” I said. “Waste is wicked.”

“Yes,” she answered, musing, “I suppose it is. But I am afraid I
haven’t thought about it as much as I might.”

She was looking at me, up and down, from my mud-covered rubber boots to
my old battered hat. I was clad as a clammer should be clad, and I was
not ashamed.

“You are not wicked, are you?” asked the governess. “You are not
wasteful?”

“Not of my clothes,” I answered. “I cannot be. And do you suppose my
wife would drip salt water upon her best dress?”

I thought I saw a shadow steal across her face. But the sun had left
many shadows behind him.

“It isn’t my”-- She hesitated and stopped. “Have you a wife?”

“No,” I answered shamelessly. And she laughed aloud, a sweet laugh and
low, like--like nothing else in the wide world.

“Are you a fisherman?” she asked.

I had forgotten how the garb of a clammer would be regarded by a
governess to the Rich.

“Sometimes,” I said. “I am but a passable fisherman. I can catch enough
for myself, or, if need were, for two.”

“And do you use the clams to catch the fish?”

“Some of them.”

“I should like to open this clam. How shall I do it?”

I broke the shell upon a stone, and pulled forth the clam.

“Oh,” cried the governess, “the poor thing! And doesn’t it hurt it?”

“The scientists will tell you that it does not,” I said. “Never having
been a clam, I do not know. But I know I cannot use them without
breaking the shell.”

“And what do you do with the rest?” she asked.

“The rest?”

“Yes, the rest,--those you do not use to catch fish. Come, tell me.
Don’t make me ask so many questions.”

“I like to hear you ask questions,” I said, whereupon she smiled
again. And her eyes filled with light as they had before, and I knew
that I were safer on the quicksand of the Hole than looking down into
those eyes. But I went on.

“The rest are eaten. Some make chowder, which is a mystery; some are
steamed in the oven; but the rest are covered with seaweed and baked on
hot stones. Did you never see a clambake?”

“Never,” she answered, “although I have heard them mentioned. Are they
rare feasts? I should like to see a clambake.”

“I shall have one,” I said, “and you will come. And we shall have
clams, fresh digged and weltering; and fish fresh caught; and chicken
not too fresh; and lobsters and sweet potatoes and corn and many other
things. And there will be a great pan for the shells and the husks, for
you will not throw them on the ground, as we common people do. And you
will shuck the clams with your fingers, and eat the corn from the cob.”

“Horrible!” she said. And she looked at her hands, and laughed. They
were shapely hands, soft and beautiful. I wished--but it does not
matter what I wished, for I knew I might not have it.

“Fisherman,” she said, “you amuse me. But I will come to your clambake.”

“Do you find me more amusing than your teaching?” I asked. For one does
not enjoy being laughed at by a governess with red hair and beautiful
eyes, although to stand there, close before her, and to see her laugh,
was a joy.

“Yes,” she answered, “vastly more than my teaching. My teaching is not
amusing. I weary of it.”

“Yes,” I cried, “I know it. And do you find the doings at the great
house a weariness?”

“I do,” she said. “And that is why I came here.”

“And will you come again?”

“Perhaps. But when shall that wonderful clambake be?”

“That,” I said, “is in the future. There are preparations. And besides,
I would have it to look forward to. And how am I to let you know?”

“Why,” she said, “that is a problem. Perhaps--you might leave your
invitation under that great stone.”

“And how should I know”--

“Why, again,” she said, “one might find something under the stone if he
but looked.”

And she was silent for some while.

“Fisherman,” she said suddenly, “what is your name?”

“Thomas,” I answered; “and what is yours?”

She started, and for an instant she was angry. Then she laughed again,
adorably, and blushed. “My name is Eve,” she said.

“Truly,” I said, “I should have known. And I was wrong, for mine is
Adam.”

“Now, fisherman,” she cried, “you presume.”

“I must,” I answered, “for it is the nature that God gave me.”

“And, Thomas,” she went on, “you dig in our--in Mr. Goodwin’s clam
beds.”

“I do not,” I cried, forgetting, in my anger, “they are m--, they
belong to a queer fellow who lives near.”

“Oh,” she said. “And he lets you dig there?”

“He lets me.”

She mused and looked down at the clam beds. But the water was lapping
on the flats by this, and the twilight waned.

“I wonder,” she said, and stopped.

“What?”

“I, too, would dig for clams.”

“Well,” I said, “why not? But not in that gown.”

“Would it be a waste, and wicked? But you said it was spotted already.”

“It may be cleaned,” I answered. “I wonder at you.” For I was
impatient. What a spendthrift governess!

“There are so many things I do not think of,” she said contritely.
“But I must learn. And what gown, then?”

“A short one,” I said, “and an old one, if you have such a thing. I
never heard of so extravagant a governess.”

“Oh,” she said, and smiled again. And I saw the light in her eyes,
though it was nearly dark. “And have you known many governesses,
fisherman?”

“None,” said I. “But my name is Adam.”

“You said Thomas.”

“Eve,” I replied, with firmness, “I said Adam.”

“Well, then, Adam, what else?”

“Boots,” I answered,--“rubber boots. See mine.”

It was not light enough, but she had seen.

“Yes,” she said, “but governesses do not have rubber boots.”

“They should,” said I, “for the grass is wet even now, and it is long.
But I will bring you some.”

“Oh,” she began, and stopped. And I knew she blushed, though I could
not see.

“And I wonder,” she went on, “if that queer fellow would let me dig,
too.”

“He would.”

“You seem very sure, fisherman.”

“Adam,” I corrected.

“Well, then, Adam.”

“I am sure,” I said; “and besides, I shall not tell him.”

“It is very dark,” she observed. “The twilight is quite gone.”

“Not quite gone. See the west.” Indeed, there was a light streak in the
west, and the bearded hill was marked against it.

“I must go in,” she said; but she did not rise.

“Not yet,” I urged.

“I must go in,” she repeated, “or they will send for me.” And this time
she rose.

“I will go with you,” I insisted.

“No,” she said, “you will stay. Good-night, fisherman.”

“Adam,” I corrected. “Governesses should have better memories.”

She laughed. I loved to hear her laugh, and I would have seen her eyes.

“Good-night, Adam.”

“Good-night, Eve. To-morrow”--

But she was gone, swiftly, and I stayed, as I was commanded. And my
heart was beating as no clammer’s should. For a heart-beat of above
seventy a minute is not fitting for a clammer. I sat, that night,
with my book in my lap, staring into the dark shadows, and my candle
sputtered and went out. Will this new light go out of my life, too?

       *       *       *       *       *

I sat upon the edge of the bank, just where the sod breaks off to the
sand, and I stared at the red sun, and he stared back at me. I sat
close beside the place where the governess had sat,--very close,--but
that place was vacant. For perhaps, I thought, perhaps-- And the old
sun spread his colors lavishly over the still water and upon the wet
sand; his purples and his reds and his dainty shades of pink and blue
and green. If I could mix my colors like that--or are they mixed? My
scientific training does not help me much. It does not tell me why the
colors are now brighter than they were yesterday, and now sombre.
There is more than one kind of reflection, and science knows them not.
And, as I stared and wondered--for these things are marvels--came a
sweet voice behind me, and my heart leaped up into my throat and choked
me. And I did not stop to reflect that it was not my heart at all,
but some ganglion or plexus or what not. What cared I for ganglion or
plexus?

“Fisherman,” said the sweet voice, “you are early.”

“Eve,” said I,--and my voice was steady,--“may a man come too early to
Paradise? The woman comes after--though I have all my ribs.”

“Fisherman,” she said, “you are a strange man.”

“So I have heard,” I answered. “But you forget. A governess should
have a better memory. I wonder that you can teach.”

“I am but a passable teacher, Adam. I cannot even teach well enough for
one.”

“Well enough for two, if we be the two. For I am learning.”

“Adam,” she said, “I might speak seriously to you. I ought to be angry
with you”--

“But you are not. It is strange how seldom we are what we should be. I
should call you ‘lady,’ as though I were a car conductor, and be most
respectful, as befitteth a fisherman”--

“But you are not. Why, Adam?”

“How should I know? It is the nature that God gave me. And those who
stand nearest to nature--well, I am learning. Come and sit here, Eve,
where I can see you.”

“Now, Adam, really--you must learn. Even a fisherman should not need to
be told to stand”--

“Your pardon, madam,” I cried, standing. “You are right, and as I said,
I am but a passable fisherman. Did the first man stand, in Paradise?
Probably he ran. But I do not, for I can see you well as we are--and
that light on your hair, Eve”--

She stamped her foot. “Fisherman,” she cried, “it is too much. I will
not stay. Remember that”--

“I am a fisherman. I will,” I said. “And you are a governess.”

Then she laughed, which was what I wanted. I was missing the sun’s
good-night, but what of that? For I might see his marvels half the days
in the year; but this marvel that I saw--how many days? I wished,--but
my wishes are vain. Still, there was I, looking up, and there was she,
looking down and smiling yet, and the glory of the west was in her eyes
and on her hair.

“Turn, fisherman,” she said, “or you will miss your good-night to the
sun.”

“What I see pleases me better,” I said. “But stand beside me, and we
will bid him good-night together.”

So she stood beside me, which was a marvel, and the sun rested his red
rim on the bearded hill, and we saw him sink. And as the last thin line
of red vanished behind the hill, I saluted, and so did she. And then
she laughed. I love a ready laugh,--mine is not ready, but has to be
pumped out, with a great noise,--and such an one as hers--

“Now, Adam,” she said, “we must dig. We have wasted time.”

“No,” I answered, “for the beds are but now uncovered. See the colors,
Eve. What would you give to paint like that? There is but one Painter.”

“One could never learn,” she said, “there is so much to learn.”

“But we are learning every day.”

“And what have you learned to-day, Adam?”

“Many things.”

“From the sun?”

“From the sun,” I answered, “and from you.”

“From me!” she cried. “What have you learned from me, fisherman?”

“Some day I will tell you, governess,” I said.

“What day, fisherman?”

“When we dig for clams at dawn.”

“And when will that day be?”

“In more than one week, and less than two.”

“And why not any day, Adam,--when I will?”

“The tide, Eve. Even a woman must wait for the tide. See, it has made
us late to-night.”

“Come, fisherman,” she said, “let us dig quickly, or it will be too
late.”

So I drew the boots from my basket, and she took them.

“Fisherman,” she said, “these are new. Where did you get them?”

“I had them,” I replied; which was true. I had had them since the
morning.

She sat behind a tree and put them on, and I heard her laughing to
herself. Then she came forth.

“They are too large,” she said, “but it does not matter.”

I might have known it. But what know I of women’s boots?

“My stock is small,” I answered. “I had no other size.” And that was
true, too.

So I showed her how to dig, and when her hoe broke through a shell, she
almost wept. But she dug six.

“I am tired,” she said then. “I will dig no more to-night. Does your
back get tired, too?”

“Not now,” said I, “but it did at first.”

Then she sat behind the tree and changed the boots, and we hung them in
the tree against another time. And then we sat upon the bank, for the
colors had not faded. And Eve sat silent, gazing at the water and the
western sky; and I sat silent and gazed up at her.

“Eve,” said I.

She turned and looked at me, but did not speak.

“I think many things,” I said, “and some of them I would say.”

“No,” she answered, “do not say them. Watch the sky and the water while
the colors last. See, it is almost dark.”

“The water and the sky are from everlasting to everlasting, Eve, so far
as I am concerned. But you--no, I must make the most of what I have.”

“Fisherman,” she said, “you must not speak so to me.”

“And why not, governess? Does it displease you? May a fisherman not say
his say to a governess? If I were a--what must I be, to rank with a
governess? Would my speech offend you then?”

“Adam,” she answered, “I came here to dig for clams.”

“Truly,” said I, “we did, and to see the sun go down.”

“And the sun is gone, and the clams are digged, and I must go.”

“Eve,” I observed, “you are a logician.”

“I am not,” she replied. “I am a woman.”

“Heaven be praised for that!” I cried. “A perfect work!”

“Adam,” she said, and she was half laughing as she spoke, “I ought to
be angry with you.”

“You ought not,” I answered, “for it heats the blood and causes vapors
in the brain. Or so the ancient writers tell us. Besides, I do not like
it.”

“Like a woman’s postscript,” said she. “You are a strange fisherman.”

“Truly,” I said, “I am. But see the water and the sky, Eve. What peace
and tranquillity! Can you feel anger when you look upon that? And what
am I? The grass of the field, and to-morrow I shall be cast into the
oven. For to-morrow it will be hot.”

“You speak much nonsense, Adam.”

“Nonsense is the savor of life, Eve.”

She said nothing, but sat there, with her hands clasped about her
knees, and I gazed up at her and was content. And the twilight faded
and was gone.

“Now I must go,” she said at last.

She rose, regretfully, I thought, and the thought gave me joy. And that
was marvel, too; for what was this governess to me--this governess whom
I had seen but twice? But that unruly ganglion of mine--

“Adam,” she said, smiling down at me, “you have not scolded me. My
gown”--

“Your gown is well enough,” I answered; “too good for clamming, but I
suppose it is the worst you could do. If I said more of it, it would be
that you look adorable in that gown--or any other. But I must not say
it, or you will be angry.”

“No,” she said, “you must not say that, for anger heats the blood and
causes vapors in the brain, and I have enough already. It is the oldest
gown I have--and the shortest.”

“It is”--

“Never mind. If it is wasteful and wicked, I cannot help it. Will it do
for digging clams to-morrow?”

“We may not dig clams to-morrow.”

“And why not, Adam,--if I will?”

“The tide. It will be too late. But the sun will go down.”

“Good-night, Adam. You may have the clams I dug.”

“If I could press them, Eve, like flowers! Good-night.”

And again I sat through an evening too long for a clammer; and, though
my book was in my hand, and my candle burned bright and clear, I did
not read, but I stared into the dark shadows. And from those shadows
there shone out that wonderful hair with the light upon it from the
western sky; and those wonderful eyes, with the light in them from the
soul within. Oh, Eve, Eve! And I have seen you only twice.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a restlessness that seizes upon men in certain case. I have
seen it often, and wondered at the poor fools who turned from this to
that, then tried the other thing, and found no satisfaction in any.
And I have laughed at them and counseled them to turn to clamming. And
there is a cure for that malady, too; a simple cure, as simple as the
fount of eternal youth. It is only to find it and the thing is done.
And some find the fount, and some do not. And those who find it, why,
eternal youth is theirs, and joy and peace are in their abiding places
forever. And those who find it not, why, Heaven help them! For there is
no peace for them nor rest on earth.

So it befell that I rose before the dawn, and went forth. And there,
without, was a fog as thick as cheese. But though I could not see ten
fathoms, yet I looked out toward my clam beds. And then I thought:
You poor fool, shall she come down in this thickness, at four in
the morning, looking for clams? And yet again, I took my basket and
wandered in that fog like a lost soul. And the more fool I, for the
tide was not half down, and no dawn to see. And as I wandered along the
shore, angry and out of sorts, striking with my hoe in the sand, I met
one of my neighbors; and as he passed behind me, I heard him laughing
in the fog.

And my breakfast was no better. My fresh-gathered eggs were bitter
in my mouth, and they tasted of sulphur; and my coffee was gray that
should have been a rich red-brown like the copper beech; and my rolls
were lead or cotton, I knew not which. I lighted my pipe and went out.

The hot sun was burning off the fog. I stood at the foot of my garden,
where I have a seat against the trunk of an old pine, and I watched the
fog writhing and twisting in the anguish of defeat and dissolution,
vanishing into the hot air above in little jets and shreds, rolling
away over the water to the ocean, a far gray bank. And the waters of
the bay danced in the sun, and dazzled my eyes. So, for some while I
paced there, back and forth. Then I heaved a sigh and sat me upon my
seat, and the great pine whispered softly above me; but I fidgeted upon
the seat and found no peace.

So, all day, I wandered the shores, and I dug no clams, but found
myself picking shells and pebbles of bright colors. And in the early
afternoon I stood by our clam beds--Eve’s and mine--and looked up
through all the greenery toward the great house, and saw the gleam of
dresses. And I left my basket by the bank and turned and ran,--like the
fool I was. Why did I run? For as the sun was low, and my pulse high,
I wandered once more over to that place. And as I came near, behold
there on the bank sat Eve. And at the sight, that ganglion which serves
me for a heart began its rioting so that I nearly choked. But I came
nearer yet, and sat me down beside her, and she smiled at me. And then
I found that peace I had sought all day.

“Fisherman,” she said, “you are not early to-night.”

“I am not,” I said, “and yet I am. For I have haunted this place all
day, and yet I feared to come too soon.”

She did not ask me why, but pointed to my basket. “Are these your
gatherings?”

I nodded.

“Why, Adam? They are not clams--nor fish.”

“I do not know, Eve. I have done strange things to-day.”

“Are they for me?”

“What shall a governess do with pebbles?”

“They might be useful in my teaching, Adam. Are they for me?”

“If you will. Anything I have is yours”--

“Fisherman, remember”--

“Eve, Eve, how shall I remember, with you sitting beside me, and your
eyes smiling, and that light upon your hair?”

“Then I will not smile nor sit beside you. And so I must go”--

“No, no,” I cried. “Stay, for the pity of man. I will remember,--or I
will try. I cannot promise more. A fisherman and a governess! So I may
not give you the pebbles, Eve, but I will bargain with you.”

“For what?”

“For that rose you wear.” For she wore a great red rose upon her bosom.

She considered. “It is a fair bargain,” she said at last, “and I agree.
A rose for your pebbles.”

So she took her rose and fastened it upon my coat. And I did not speak
nor thank her, for I could not. What foolish thing should I have said?
It was hard enough not to kiss the hand so near my lips. And we sat
there a long while in silence, she looking at the west, and I gazing up
at her or idly sticking the little pebbles in the sod. And when the
sun was gone and she rose to go, she saw the pebbles, and they made two
words, ADAM and EVE. I thought she would have stamped upon them, but
she did not. She only smiled and bade me good-night.

And so for days I lived in purgatory and in paradise, wandering the
shore, without purpose save to pass the endless day till sunset; and at
evening I sat with Eve upon the bank until the twilight faded, and she
left me. And the weeds sprang in my garden, and my neighbors laughed
at me more than ever. For I went clamming at high tide. And upon my
mantel, between two plates of glass that were cunningly bound about the
edges, was a red rose.

Then, one evening, I waited there upon the bank and no Eve came. And I
fretted and fumed and mourned until I bethought me of the great stone.
Without hope, I looked beneath; and, wonder of wonders, there was a
scrap of paper with its message. “They will not let me come to-night.”
And I acted like the fool I was, and kissed the dainty thing, and
thrust it in my pocket, and pulled it out again a dozen times. Never
having seen her writing, I should know it, it was so like her. And I
tore a corner, though I hated to,--I had no other paper,--and wrote,
“We miss you, the sun and I. Eve, Eve, do not fail to-morrow. Do not
shut the gates upon me yet.” And I put it beneath the stone and went
away.

And in the morning the sky was gray, with low-hanging clouds, heavy
and wet. And by afternoon there was a driving drizzle, and my heart
sank. But I went. I would not fail, though I had no hope. And there,
leaning against a tree, stood Eve, the water dripping from her wide
felt hat, and shining upon her long coat. And she smiled at me as I
came, and I could not speak; but I looked at her until the slow flush
mounted to her forehead.

“Eve,” I said at last, “how shall a fisherman remember, when you stand
so, before him,--and on such a day?”

“Why, fisherman,” she said lightly, “it is a good day. I find this
weather as good as any other,--in fair measure.”

“It pleases me,” I said, “although this morning it did not.”

Then, deliberately, I went to the great stone and turned it up, and my
paper was gone. And Eve watched me, and again the slow flush mounted to
her forehead, but she said nothing. And as we stood together under the
tree, there was a constraint upon us both. The things that I would say
I might not, and for the light things that I might say, I had no heart.

And the next day, too, it rained, but I cared not. And again we stood
together under the tree, Eve and I, and as we stood there, the clouds
parted and showed the sun sinking in splendor. And I saw a greater
glory than I had seen. And when the sun was gone, there was the young
moon following.

“Peace on earth,” I said; but she did not speak.

So for some while we stood silent, and I saw the gold and the red fade
from the clouds, and the clouds themselves were gone, deep banks of
indigo, into the east. Then the western sky was grown violet and a
green like the curl of a wave, till, overhead, it became the night. And
I looked at Eve, and her look smote upon my heart, for it was troubled.
But I might not say the thing I would; for shall a fisherman so speak
to a governess to the Rich? Even a governess to the Rich may have her
woes, it seems, and it is no fisherman’s part--

“Eve,” I said. And she started, as though her thoughts were wandering.

“Eve,” I said again, “would you dig for clams at dawn? For the beds
will be uncovered by dawn to-morrow.”

“Oh,” she answered, “will they? And is it a joy to see the dawn?”

“Did you never see a dawn, Eve?”

“Never. Have I missed much?”

“If you see one, Eve, you will know how much.”

“I would like to see a dawn,” she said. And then she was silent, and I
thought her near to tears, and a great fear came upon me.

“Now, Adam,” she said, at last, “I must go. Good-night.”

Then she turned and listened. “They are coming for me now. Run, Adam.”

“Run!” I cried. “Run, when I stand upon my own? Why should I run? No, I
will stay. And they shall do nothing to you against your will.”

I had forgotten that I was a fisherman, but Eve did not note it. “Run,
Adam,” she cried, beseeching. “If you care for my peace, run.”

And so I ran, like any poacher. And that night, sitting staring into
the shadows, I wondered.

       *       *       *       *       *

My clam beds--mine and Eve’s--have many virtues. From them I can see
both east and west; from that point neither dawn nor sunset escapes
me. And another virtue they had had for me, that was more than dawn or
sunset. And what that was, any man who has been in such case as mine
will know without the telling. So, though I loved the dawn, it was more
than that that brought me stealing through the early gray of morning to
the bank, just where the sod breaks off to the sand.

There I sat and waited, alone, and I watched the gray brighten in the
east, and hoped that Eve would not be too late. And just as the gray
became a tender blue, and hope was leaving me, there was the light step
behind me, and I rose and stood, as a fisherman should stand before a
governess. And Eve did not speak to me, for she saw the east.

“Oh!” she cried softly.

And she said no word more, but there we stood together. And we saw the
blue brighten and become suffused with pink, and there in the eastern
sky lay a great rose that stretched its petals to the zenith. And in
the heart of that rose was a little cloud like a flame, with one long
finger pointed straight at Eve and me. And all those soft tints of blue
and pink, with the flame of the little cloud, were spread upon the
water that was but just stirring in its sleep, and dimpling here and
there. Then was the little flame-cloud edged with gold upon its lower
side, and shot through with orange lights, and the pink rose turned to
saffron and then to orange, and the rim of the sea was luminous, like
molten gold. And on a sudden the gold and orange fled from the little
cloud, and a great blazing fire showed above the sea.

“The sun, Eve,” I whispered; and as I spoke, a little breeze flashed
across the water and darkened it like a breath upon a mirror. And there
was the great disk of the sun half risen, and we might no longer look
him in the face.

And at that Eve fetched a great sigh, and turned, and the chorus of
the birds broke forth in the trees behind us. They had been calling
back and forth before, but now they sang madly. The old earth had waked
once more, and it was day.

“Adam,” said Eve, “I thank you.”

Then she sat upon the bank, where the colored pebbles still marked the
names, and I sat there beside her; and for some while we spoke not, but
listened to the mad music of the birds. Then Eve would dig for clams.

“What matter, Eve?” I asked. “The clams will be the bigger for waiting.
We have seen the dawn, and we may see the day grow.”

“Yes,” she said, “we have seen the dawn. I did not dream it could be
like that. There are no words, Adam. And I would see the day grow. But
for my conscience’ sake I must dig.”

“Eve,” I said, “a conscience is a most distressing comrade. Does a
governess have a conscience--a governess to the Rich?”

“Does not a fisherman?” she asked.

“He cannot afford it,” I replied. “It is a luxury not for the poor nor
for the very rich.”

“But a governess is not very rich. And if she were, she yet might have
a conscience. I have.”

“And does it plague you?”

“Yes,” she said. “Come, let us dig, and I will tell you.”

I, too, had somewhat that I would tell, and presently we were digging.
And Eve dug in silence, and gently, for she would not harm the clams.

“Well, Eve?” I said, when I was wearied of the silence.

She was so long in speaking that I feared she never would. “Adam,” she
asked, at last, “are you a wise man?”

“Very,” I answered; “wiser than Solomon. He had seven hundred wives,
and I have none.”

“And is that wise,--to have none?”

“Eve, Eve,” I cried, “you do not help me. I jest because I fear to
speak in earnest.”

“You are good, Adam,” she said. “And if you are wise, you may tell me
what to do.”

“If you would do what I tell you!”

She was bending very low over her digging, and her face was turned
away, which did not please me. I like to see her face.

“I fear that I may lose my place,” she said.

I straightened up at that, but she bent lower yet.

“Lose your place!” I cried. “And why?”

“Why--they--it is not easy to tell you, Adam.”

“I will not urge you, Eve, but”--

“You need not. I wish to tell you, for I--a governess may not always
stand alone. She is a woman, after all.”

“Yes,” I said, “thank God!”

“They--they would”-- She began to laugh, a nervous laugh and with no
mirth in it,--“they would marry me, Adam.”

“What!” I cried. “They would--who would marry you? Not old Goodwin!”

“No,” she said; and laughed the more, and seemed really merry at it.
“Now I feel better. Not old Goodwin. He has a wife.”

I was puzzled.

“Who, then, Eve? Who would marry you? I doubt not there are many who
would, for I know”--

“It is old Goodwin’s wife,” she said, breaking me off short, and just
in time.

Then she stood straight. “Now, Adam,” she went on, “I am not so nervous
as I was, but I may laugh or I may cry with no reason. I will sit upon
the bank and tell you, for truly I am in straits. And do you bear with
me, for you are honest, and I may trust you. And indeed I know no other
I may trust--but one.”

“A governess advised in matrimony by a fisherman!” I said. “And who is
that one, Eve?”

“You shall hear. And do not jest, Adam, or my laughter may turn to
tears. They are near enough. And now for the story, which is a short
one. Old Goodwin’s wife would marry me to a certain rich man,--for my
worldly good, as she says.”

“A certain rich man,” I said, musing. “And will he enter the Kingdom of
Heaven?”

“That he will not.”

“Then why doubt? And do you love him, Eve?”

“I do not.”

“Then why doubt?”

“If I do not,” she said, “I shall lose my place. And that is much to
me, Adam, for what shall I do then? The man whom I may trust is old
Goodwin, but he is not so much my friend as to hold against his wife.”

“And what said you to the man?”

“I said no, but still he came. And now I know not what I shall say
next.”

“Shall I tell you what to do, Eve?”

“If you know, Adam.”

“Marry me,” I said. And she looked at me with wide eyes and laughed;
and at that laugh I was sore and hurt, though I had no right. Then her
laugh died and her eyes filled.

“Forgive me, Adam,” she said. “I should not laugh, but indeed I am
overwrought. Truly--truly I might almost find it in my heart”--

I stood before her, trembling. “I should not have said it, Eve. What is
a fisherman, that he should offer the little that he has to you? But I
am well-to-do, Eve,--for a fisherman. You should never want--nor work.
And if you might find it in your heart”--

“I will consider your offer, good fisherman,” she said, smiling. “I
must consider. You have--I must tell you, in justice, you have an even
chance with that other. But I must consider.”

“So an honest fisherman, well-to-do, has an even chance with a rich
rascal whom you do not love. That is a high price on honesty, Eve.”

“Yes,” she said, “but not too high. And now, Adam, be my good friend
still.”

“I will,” I replied, “if I may not be more.”

So she was silent, and so was I. And presently I reached down to my
basket and drew forth a package wrapped in a napkin.

“Governess,” I asked, “are you, by chance, hungry?”

“Fisherman,” she answered, “I am famished; but not by chance. Open,
quickly.”

So I unwrapped the package, and in it were slices of white bread, cut
thin, and between, lettuce picked that morning, crisp and cool. And we
ate together, and Eve grew merry, and my content came back to me.

“Fisherman,” she said at last, “I thank you. Now I must go.”

“Thank me for what, Eve?”

“It was the sandwiches I meant,” she said.

“And how long must you consider? When shall I have my answer?”

“Your answer? Oh, when I come to your clambake.”

“It shall be to-morrow,” I said.

“Oh, not so soon,” she cried.

“The day after, then.”

She hesitated. “Well,” she said, “good-by.”

“I shall come here for you, Eve.”

But she was gone, and I went, too, my brain in turmoil.

       *       *       *       *       *

Down under my great pine is a pleasant place for a man--or for a
governess, I should suppose--with a heart at ease. And for a fisherman
whose heart is not at ease it serves as well as any place but one, and
that one not fixed, but moving as she moves. And for a certain rich man
it might, indeed, be pleasant under my pine, but not if I could make it
otherwise. And there was the seat against the tree, and from that seat
he might see my favorite clam beds. But what would rich men care for
clam beds? And, for the seat, why, I had other views.

It was there, just without the shadow of the pine, that the hole was
scooped in the ground and lined with great stones. And on these stones
I kindled a fire that roared high; and when it had burned long and the
stones were hot, I raked the ashes off. Then I shook down upon the
stones fresh seaweed from the pile, and on the seaweed laid the clams
that I had digged, myself--and alone--that morning. Then, more seaweed;
and the other things, in layers, orderly, with the clean, salt-smelling
weed between: the lobsters, green and crawling, and the fish, fresh
caught, and the chicken, not too fresh, and the sweet and tender corn,
and sweet potatoes. And over all I piled the weed and made a dome that
smoked and steamed and filled the air with incense.

Then, my work done, I sat there and looked out. And when it was time
I garbed myself and set forth. And my heart-beat was too high, by far,
and there was a faintness at my throat. But I strode along the shore
and came to our bank, where the colored pebbles shone in the sun, ADAM
and EVE. And there I sat, just where the sod breaks off to the sand,
and waited. And presently there was the light step I knew so well,
and up came my heart into my throat and choked me. But I stood, as a
fisherman should before a governess, and turned.

And such a governess! All in light, filmy white, with two red roses
at her bosom, and her hair a glory. And her eyes,--there are no other
such eyes as hers,--her eyes smiled at me, and then they opened wide in
wonder.

“Adam,” she said, “is it you? Are you my fisherman?”

“Truly,” I answered, “I am your fisherman, whether you will or
not,--and for as long as I have life.”

“The time is not yet, fisherman,” she said. “Remember.”

“It is hard to remember, governess, even for a fisherman.”

“I did not know you, Adam,” she said. “You should have told me.”

“What, Eve? That a fisherman may have decent raiment? But I am
well-to-do--for a fisherman.”

“Come,” said she, “let us go, or we shall be late to the clambake.”

“With all my heart,” I answered, “though it matters not if we are late.
For there is but one guest.”

“There will be two, Adam.”

“Two!” I cried. “I have asked but one. If it is that certain rich man,
I give you warning he shall have no clams of mine, but I will cast him
into the sea.”

“It is my father, Adam,” she replied. “He is here and would see a
clambake, so I asked him.”

“Your father, Eve? Do governesses have fathers? And is he here to help
you?”

“I hope that he will help me,” she said. “I think he will.”

And she smiled brightly.

My heart grew cold, and froze beneath my ribs. “Then,” I said, “you
will not need help from a fisherman, governess.”

“Adam,” she said, reproaching, “let us enjoy our clambake.”

“That is good doctrine, Eve,” said I, “and I will do my best. But how
will your father know”--

“It is for him to find it,” she answered, “and he may, for he has
eyes and a nose. Now I might find my way straight enough, for I see a
smoking mound upon that point, beneath the pine. It seems a pleasant
place, Adam.”

“That queer fellow that I mentioned let me use it,” I said in haste.
“He is from home just now.”

“He seems a good friend of yours,” she said.

“At times I think he is,” I said, “and at other times he is the poorest
friend I know.”

As we talked we walked along the shore. And we climbed the steep path
and stood beneath the pine. The dome of seaweed still smoked bravely,
and before the seat against the pine was set a little table, upon
stakes. It was just large enough for two, and upon it were all things
fitting--and no more. No cloth, only the bare white boards of pine,
rubbed smooth.

“Now, governess,” I said, “the bake is done. Do you sit there, and I
will serve you.”

“No, Adam,” she cried, “for I must help.”

She always had her will, that red-haired governess. So I took my fork
and opened the smoking dome, and together we set upon the table corn
and sweet potatoes and a chicken and a fish and the lobsters; and,
last of all, a great pan of clams. And the rest, upon the hot stones,
I covered again with seaweed. And as I pitched the weed, I heard Eve
laughing.

“Adam,” she said, “look here. And there are two of us.”

I turned and saw the table filled to overflowing, and no place left
large enough to set a plate; and Eve sitting on the seat, and laughing
so that tears stood in her eyes.

“I should have made the table larger,” I said. “But we need no plates.
What would the first man have done with a plate, Eve?”

“Or with baked clams?” she asked. “But we are not in Eden.”

“I am,” I said.

And she spoke hastily: “At least the other guest shall not want.”

“Let us begin,” I said, “while the clams are hot. There is yet more.”

So we sat side by side upon the bench, and the wind whispered softly in
the tree above. And suddenly Eve rose.

“My father, Adam,” she said. “He is just in time.”

I stood and turned. Her father! It was Goodwin the Rich; and my castles
were tumbling about my ears.

So we saw each other, he and I, and looked each other up and down, and
either measured other. And though he was Goodwin the Rich, he seemed
a man, and I hoped he thought as much of me. And he said something
about clams and his daughter, I know not what, and I said some foolish
thing, I know not what. Then I fetched a box from my shed, for him to
sit upon,--a proper seat for the Rich,--and he seemed to like it, and
tilted back and forth, and ate prodigious quantities of clams and all
things else, and pronounced them uncommon good.

And I sat mute, but Eve talked steadily, a merry talk, and ate the
heads of the clams--or tried to eat them--and found them but ill
eating--until I showed her how to take the clam by the head and dip him
in the butter, and eat him properly. And she bit the corn from the cob,
and opened the clams with her fingers, and I watched her in adoration
and despair. For what should I say to a Daughter of the Rich?

So there we sat long at my little table under my great tree, and I saw
the tide lapping high upon the shore, and heard the wind that sighed
loud in the pine. And indeed that sighing wind fell in marvelously with
my mood, for I was not merry, as any may guess. And at last Goodwin the
Rich had filled him full with lobster and corn and clams, and he seemed
well pleased, and sat upon his box, and smiled and exhaled peace. And
in a while he rose and made some excuse, and thanked me and went his
way.

Then, when he was gone, I sat there still and looked out upon the
water, and said nothing. For I could not look at Eve and be content,
but still I had the water and the shore. And I felt that Eve was
watching me and smiling.

“Adam,” she said at last.

“Well?”

“We have had a pleasant clambake, have we not? Such a feast as I never
had.”

I made no reply.

“Fisherman,” she said then, “you should make some pretty speech.”

“Is it for a fisherman,” I asked, “to make pretty speeches? He must
catch his fish and dig his clams.”

“You have changed so, Adam,” she said, reproaching.

“It is not I have changed,” I answered.

Still I would not look at her, but she was silent, and I knew her smile
was gone.

“And is there nothing more?” she asked. “Is it ended?”

“It is ended,” I said. “Even the stones grow cold.”

“Adam,” she cried, “why will you be so contrary? It is not ended. I
will not have it so.”

“The Rich may have what they will,” I said, “nearly, but not quite. I
was not made for a plaything for the Rich.”

“You are bitter, and you are not fair,” she said softly. “It is not
like you, Adam. There is something more. Why will you make it hard?”

“I will not make it hard,” I answered. “There is nothing else. What
has a fisherman to say to a Daughter of the Rich, or she to him? So,
for that other matter, Miss Goodwin, I absolve you from an answer.”

“Adam,” she cried, “you make me angry. I have a mind to go home.”

“Shall I see you on your way?” I asked.

“I will not have it so,” she said, and stood and stamped her foot. I
knew well how she must look, in that pretty rage. “And you forgot,
Adam.”

“What?” I asked. “I would not fail in duty.”

“My name,” she said. “I told you it was Eve.”

“Are you not Miss Goodwin?”

“Adam,” she said firmly, “I said Eve.”

“Well, Eve, have you not done with me?” I sighed and would not look at
her, though she stood before me.

“No, I have not,” she said. “I should laugh if I were not so angry.
Look at me.”

I stood and looked down at her, an instant but no more. I could not,
for I should have choked.

“Eve, Eve,” I cried, “have you no mercy? Must the Rich destroy the
playthings that they weary of?”

“Adam,” she said, “you have a duty yet. Do not shirk it. A fisherman
must not shirk his duty.”

“I am but a drowned fisherman,” I replied. “But what a drowned man may
do, I will do.”

“You promised to be my good friend,” she said. “So come back with me
along the shore.”

So we went down the steep path and side by side along the shore, where
the water lapped high. And we came to our bank, where the pebbles shone
in the sun, and there Eve sat her down.

“Sit beside me, Adam.”

And down I sat, as wretched as man was ever, and I looked into the
water that covered my clam beds. I doubted I should have heart to dig
in those beds again.

“Adam,” said Eve, and her voice was not steady, “I have considered,
and”--

“Eve,” I cried, “can you not spare me that? If you feel any friendship
for me, spare me that. I am blind enough, but I can see”--

“Oh, you are the blindest man that ever was.” And she slipped her hand
within my arm, and drew it back again and began to cry softly. And at
that I sprang to my feet, and my heart thumped like a hammer, till I
thought it would burst my ribs.

“Eve, Eve,” I cried, my voice shaking so it shamed me, “do not play
with me. Do you mean”--

“Oh, you blind man, can you not see what I mean? Must I say it more
plainly? It is yes, Adam, and no play.”

And she smiled at me through her tears, and suddenly, for me, earth and
sky were flooded with a great glory.

Now, what I did next, I shall not tell, nor what she said to me; for
those are things for my Eve and me to know and to remember. But any
man who has been in such case as mine may guess to some purpose, if he
will but try. And after some time, I know not how long, we sat there
side by side upon the bank, most decorous, for out upon the water was a
boat. But we might say what we would, and I might hold her hand, down
upon the sod, out of sight, and I might gaze into her wonderful eyes
and see in them the tender light that made them pass all wonders.

“Such trouble as I had to get you, Adam, at the last!”

“It served you right,” I said, “for your deceit.”

She laughed, a happy laugh. “You honest fisherman!” she said. “It was
so easy to deceive you! But never again, Adam. You may trust me.”

“Always,” I answered, and stooped low and kissed the hand I held. And
she stooped, too, and quite by chance, and if they saw us from the
boat, I did not care.

“And were you deceived?” I asked.

“Yes,” she said, “for half an hour. You are too honest, Adam. But I
love you for it.”

And then we did some other silly things, and cared not for the boat.

“And what of old Goodwin, Eve?” I asked, after some while. “What will
he say?”

She laughed again her happy laugh. “What did he say, Adam? He seemed
pleased, I thought.”

“Eve,” I cried, “you do not mean”--

“He came there for that purpose, Adam. I confessed to him. He is my
friend, I told you.”

“Honest gentleman!” I said. “I beg his pardon. He may have my clam beds
if he will.”

“No, no,” she cried, “for they must be mine, too, those clam beds. I
will not have them changed.”

“They are yours, Eve,” I said, “for they were mine and I am yours. See
the colors the old sun spreads over them now. He is almost sitting on
that hill.”

“We will bid him good-night, together,” she said; “a happy one, Adam.
Stand beside me.”

So we stood, and she clasped my fingers close in hers, and we saw the
sun, that he spread the still water with all manner of reds and purples
and shimmering greens. And as the last thin line of red vanished behind
the bearded hill, we saluted. And again we sat upon the bank, and saw
the red west turn to violet, and then to green. And then Eve rose and
said good-night.

“Until to-morrow, Adam,” she said.

“Until to-morrow, Eve,” I echoed.

And then she seemed to listen.

“They are coming for me, Adam. If you love me, run!”




II

A DAUGHTER OF THE RICH




A DAUGHTER OF THE RICH


Some there may be who will say--who do say, no doubt, for they dearly
love a bit of gossip--that I am no better than an adventurer; that I
have wormed my way into a girl’s heart under false pretenses, and will
but devour what I find there; and that two weeks--or three, or whatever
the time was, according to the usual measure of man--is too short a
time for two people to have found out that they love each other. Now,
those who are most apt to speak thus foolishly are my neighbors, who
have mated according to their lights; and I have not observed that they
are happier than other folk. Indeed, I doubt whether they are as happy.

It is not to be imagined that my neighbors have remonstrated with
me upon the subject. But I have observed, when I have met two of
them together, they do but wait until I am out of hearing--sometimes
scarcely that--before they get their heads together.

“That’s the fellow,” says one, “who is engaged to Old Goodwin’s
daughter.”

“Is it, indeed?” says the other--and turns his head about, that he see
me the better. And I stop short and lean casually upon a wall, my face
toward them. For I would not cheat them of their birthright.

“Yes,” says the first. “In two weeks. Disgraceful, I call it.”

They gaze at me--both of them--as if I were some monster from a museum.

“Rich, isn’t he?” asks the second. “Goodwin, I mean--not this fellow.”

And they pass on, laughing uproariously. I would not stint their mirth,
and giving over my leaning upon the wall, I, too, pass on.

Therefore it comes to pass that I have no great opinion of my
neighbors’ judgment. Indeed, I contend that they speak of that they
know not of. Eve agrees with me in this,--she agrees with me in most
things, now,--for have we not been engaged for one whole month, and not
the littlest shadow on our happiness? And still I am wont to take my
basket on my arm and my clam hoe in my hand and wander the shores. But
the clams that I dig would make but a sorry meal, and the clams that I
leave--well, they will be the bigger and the lustier for digging when
I am minded to it. And it is easy to guess what clam beds I frequent.

So it befell that I wandered, one afternoon, over the oozy flats toward
my chosen hunting ground. The sun was getting low in the west, and well
I knew what colors the Great Painter was spreading over the still water
and upon the shining mud. But yet I would not look at them, but wended
on, at a pace too great for a clammer. And joy was in my heart. For
there, just where the sod broke off to the sand and the pebbles shone
bright in the sun, sat Eve. And she smiled upon me as she spoke.

“Adam,” said she, reproving, “you are almost late to-night.”

And, at that, the ganglion that I have mentioned, that does duty for
my heart, leaped for joy, so that I was nigh to choking. And indeed,
though it is but a ganglion, it knows its duty well, and leaps for joy
or aches with sorrow as well as the best-behaved heart in the world. I
have not known the ache for sorrow since the day of my clambake; but it
can make a man very wretched. And I am convinced that it can ache for
pure joy, too--although that is a different ache, with happiness in it.

So I smiled back at her. “Almost late,” I said, “is just in time. Late
has no”--

“Adam, Adam,” she cried, “are you become a grammarian? Grammarians are
tiresome. And I must go, for I have an engagement”--

“No, no,” I answered, in haste; for though in my heart I knew well she
did but jest, yet I feared to lose her. “There is small danger that
I shall become a grammarian. I have put all that behind me. It gets
farther behind me with every day that passes. And your engagement is
with me.”

She laughed, a low, sweet laugh.

“Yes,” she said, “it was.”

And we sat there, silent, and Eve gazed at the sun, that was near
his setting, and he gazed back at her. He set no longer behind the
bearded hill,--the time was passed for that,--but there were other
hills, and he must set behind them, for that is his destiny. And if
any should say to me that I do but ill to speak thus of his destiny,
for that his destiny is a greater than that; and if that one should
hint of some hypothesis or other concerning the life and death of the
universe,--they may have a new one now--they may get up a new one
every week, for aught I know or care; for what is the death of the
universe to me?--I should answer such an one in this wise: “Go to, you
speak foolishly. For have I not seen him every evening of my life, that
he sets in the west? Talk not to me of any hypothesis. I know what I
know.”

And I was leaning on my elbow, down upon the sod, and idly gazing at
the sun, and idly gazing up at Eve. But I gazed at Eve the more. And
the west was all golden, with a soft haze everywhere that left nothing
with sharp outlines, and the sun was set, like a great yellow diamond,
in its midst. It was one of those days--come a month or more before its
time--when the whole earth seems to drowse and doze and breathe forth
peace.

“Eve,” I said softly, for I almost feared lest I break the spell that
was upon us.

She turned to me, but did not speak.

“Would you have me analyze those colors that we see? I might make shift
to do it. Would this soft light be more beautiful to you”--

“Oh, no, no,” she cried. “Let it be. See, the sun is almost down. Stand
beside me, Adam.”

So I stood, and she clasped my fingers close in hers, and we faced the
west, for we would bid the old sun good-night. And as we stood thus,
came Old Goodwin, silently, and stood at her other side. And she took
his hand in hers, too, one hand to each, and we looked at the sun, and
his rim rested on the hill. And there stood a tree, great and tall like
a spire, that showed black against his disk. So we watched him sink,
and as the last thin line vanished behind the hill, we saluted, all
three. Then Eve breathed a deep sigh.

“Such a lovely day, Adam,” she said, “ended in beauty! If all the days
could be like this!”

I remembered me of a day, not two months back, that had been a driving
drizzle of rain, and of a certain figure that had stood beneath a tree,
and the water dripped from the rim of her wide felt hat, and shone upon
her long coat. And that day, with all its wetness, had seemed as good
a day as this, for she had smiled to see me coming along the shore, my
face as black as the clouds, and not expecting to find her; and she had
smiled again to see my face change at the sight of her, and to see
that I could not speak for the joy of it. But I had looked at her until
she flushed red.

“Truly,” said I, “beauty is from within, Eve, and each day is but what
we make it.”

Then Eve and I sat us down upon the bank where we were wont to sit,
and Old Goodwin gave me a quiet smile for greeting. He was a quiet
man, peaceable and peace-loving, and I marveled, often, that he should
be Goodwin the Rich. But so it was. And his automobiles flashed past
my front gate, as they had done before, covering my hedge with dust
and enveloping my house in nauseous smells; also as they had done
before. But I like automobiles better than I did. I even ride in them
sometimes, with Eve, on the back seat; and Old Goodwin rides on the
front seat, and drives as though the Devil were after him; which I
think he is not, for Old Goodwin is a lovable man, and a good man I
believe, as men go. So I sit in the back seat, with Eve, and hold my
clothes on,--my hat I long ago learned to leave at home,--and I bump
here and there, and now and then I shout a tender word to Eve, and I
think my thoughts; and when we turn a corner--on two wheels--I thank
goodness that there are high sides to hold me in.

But Old Goodwin had gone to a tree that was at hand, and from some
recess had pulled some rubber boots. They were old boots, battered
and dingy with much wading through mud. And after the boots came a
hat, as old and battered as they, and a coat. And he put them all on,
deliberately, and stood. And, standing, he looked more like some old
fisherman than like Goodwin the Rich, which was, no doubt, why he wore
them. My neighbors would be but too happy if they were to see Old
Goodwin--and know him--digging in my clam beds, and their tongues are
ever ready at inventing tales. Those neighbors of mine are a grief to
Eve, and an incitement to anger, which, as every one knows, heats the
blood and causes vapors in the brain. Eve does not like vapors. So I
was at some pains to get those boots.

And Old Goodwin, after further searching in the tree, drew forth a clam
hoe and a basket; and being thus equipped, he hied him to the flats,
which were, by now, almost bare, and he began to dig. Now that is a
luxury which the rich may seldom have, that they should dig for clams.
Old Goodwin enjoyed it mightily, splashing here and there in his boots,
and digging as the fancy seized him; which was as like to be where the
clams were not as where they were. But he cared not at all, and drew
long breaths for very joy of living; and the clams that he found he
put within his basket. And with his boots, as he waded here and there,
he stirred long lines of color that went rippling in waves of yellow
or red or a tender blue until they died at our feet. For the west was
all a brilliant, dazzling yellow, with one long cloud that showed
indigo above, but a bright crimson below. And behind us were other long
clouds, and they were crimson, too. But the sky between was a tender
blue. And I gazed long.

“Adam,” cried Eve at last, “how can you be content to sit there?”

I looked up in some surprise. “Should I not be content?” I said. “For
here are you, beside me, and before us is spread a picture of peace
that changes with each moment that passes. Look at that tranquil water,
Eve, with its long tongue of blue that marks the current. Should I not
be content?”

“Yes, yes,” she answered, “I hope so. I trust so, always--with me
beside you. I would not have it otherwise. But even the tranquil water
has its current. Let us dig, too.”

I laughed--as quietly as I could, for I would not break that
tranquillity. She had me there.

“What a governess!” I said. “She has her way always. Well, then, let
us dig--though it seems a pity to disturb the clams.”

“They live in eternal darkness,” said Eve. “It is better for them to be
disturbed. Besides, Adam, I came to dig. I got this gown on purpose.”

I had not noticed the gown. But she stood straight before me, and I
looked her up and down, as she would have me. Truly, I could see no
difference between that gown and any other--save that it was shorter.
But Eve would look adorable in any--and it was the woman that I saw.

I said as much. “To tell the truth,” I said, “I did not see your gown.
What does it matter what you wear?”

“To dig?” she said, reproving. “Have you forgotten, Adam? Surely you
would not have your wife drip salt water upon her best dress and spot
it?”

As she spoke she looked at me, and I saw that in her eyes that brought
me up upon one knee. At least I might kiss her hand, with Old Goodwin
pottering about my clam beds. He considerately turned his back upon us.

And so we digged for clams, too, until the light had faded from the
western sky, and the twilight was almost gone. And when, at last, Old
Goodwin turned and lumbered peacefully up the bank and sat him down to
become once more Goodwin the Rich, behold, our basket was well filled.
For Eve and I have but the one basket; and her back does not tire now.

And I, too, sat me down--for Eve had to take off her rubber boots--and
I sat me near Old Goodwin. And he gave me once more that quiet smile of
greeting that breathed of peace.

“And Mrs. Goodwin?” I asked. “Will she not see me yet?”

“Not yet,” he answered, still with that quiet smile. “But do you have
patience. She will come around--at least, I hope so. It was rather--in
the way of a surprise, you know. And as a surprise,” he added, with a
chuckle of delight, “it was rather good--yes, it was a success.”

I sighed. I am not a patient man; and here was Old Goodwin counseling
me to have patience. There is nothing harder for me to have.

“I have had patience,” I said; “and shall have it until it leaves me.
And when that will be I do not know, but not so long as I can keep it
with me. And, after all, I do not know that I care--except for Eve’s
sake.”

“No,” he said, and the smile was gone. “You win in any case,--or so it
seems to me. She loses. Remember that. She loses. And so I ask you to
have patience. It is worth while, if only for Eve’s sake.”

“It is not easy for me to be patient,” I replied. “But I will,--at
least I will try. That I promise, and no man can promise more. For I
win in any case. She may gain a son or lose a daughter--but Eve-- No, I
will be patient.”

Old Goodwin had got his boots changed by this, and now he rose--Goodwin
the Rich.

“I thank you, Adam,” he said. He called me Adam, too. “It will be the
easier for me. And that is something to you--is it not?”

I jumped to my feet and seized his hand. “It is much to me,” I cried.
“If ever you see me going wrong, I beg you to remind me. For Eve’s
sake and yours. That will bring me back.”

Indeed, he had been my good friend--my good friend and Eve’s. And now
he smiled once more Old Goodwin’s quiet smile. I loved that smile,
breathing peace on earth and good will to men. It was easy to see where
Eve had got hers. She smiled with her eyes, too, and in them I saw--but
perhaps that was for me alone. But Old Goodwin, with his quiet smile,
was yet Goodwin the Rich. It was a marvel.

“You are good children,” he said. “Good-night,--and bless you.”

So he ambled off, up the path that was beginning to show, even in that
dim light. For a path is made by walking upon it, and even once a day
will serve for that. And that path was walked on more than once a day.
As he reached a turn, he waved his hand to us, and we to him.

“Eve,” I said, musing, “there goes a good man.”

She turned to me. “He is,” she said. “And I am glad to have you think
that, Adam. There are those--who say cruel things of him.”

“They are wrong,” I cried. “I am convinced of it. From all envy,
hatred, and malice, good Lord, deliver us. But what of that other rich
man, Eve?”

As I looked up at Eve, waiting for my answer, I saw that she was
smiling merrily.

“I told him,” she said, “that I was engaged already. And he seemed
surprised at that, and he would know the name of the happy man. And
I told him that, too. Did I do well? Are you”-- She stopped and
hesitated.

“Am I happy, Eve?” I answered softly. “Surely you know that I am.
Happier than I thought I should ever be. And what did he say to that?”

“Oh, then, he did not understand. For I think he did not know you,
Adam. And I said you were a fisherman, or a clammer, as occasion
served. You should have seen his face. And he but wished me joy, and
went; which was what I wanted.”

I chuckled. For I do chuckle on occasion.

“I have no other occupation,” I said, “and neither has he. And he
comes, in his yacht, to ask you,--steam yachts are luxuries, Eve, which
my wife will know nothing of,--he comes, very grand, in his yacht, to
ask you. And you tell him that you are to wed a digger of clams. And
where is he now?”

“I do not know,” she answered; and the smile faded.

And I thought my thoughts, and was silent. Truly, the digging of clams
has its delights, and not all the rich are fitted to partake thereof.
For how many of them see what lies before their eyes? How many of them
see the colors the old sun spreads on the still water and the shining
mud? A flat is a flat to them, a thing to be shunned; a thing that will
spoil their white flannels and get their dresses all muddy. Not all of
them are Old Goodwins. And the works of the Great Painter are not for
such as these. But the colors were gone now, and the light, too, and I
heard Eve sighing.

“What is it, Eve?” I asked. “Must you go?”

“Soon,” she said, “very soon. But I was thinking of my mother. She
hinted--almost threatened--that he would come again.”

“That rich man?” I said. “He is better forgot.” And, indeed, I had
forgot him already. “After all, what does it matter? His goings and his
comings are nothing to us. And your mother--was it hard to tell her? I
did what I could.”

“It was not easy,” she answered, and I knew by her voice that tears
were in her eyes, though I could not see. “Your note, Adam, she tore up
before my eyes. Oh, I was angry! And I said what I should not. And then
she said--she was angry, too--that she would not come to my wedding”--

“We will have patience, Eve,” I said, “and perhaps she may change her
mind. And for the note, why, it is better torn up than passed around
among her friends to be laughed over. Yes, I am glad about the note.”

“And I saved the pieces--every one,” she said then, laughing shyly.
“After my mother was gone, I gathered them up. But now I must go,
Adam. See, it is quite dark. You may come up the path with me--if you
will--for just a minute.”

If I would! And if our parting took more than just the minute she had
said, why, I will bear the blame--if blame there is. For I left her
happy and with her eyes shining. And so I stumbled home along the
shore, my heart singing. And my supper--for what clammer would dine
at seven--was ambrosia and nectar, being plain corn meal mush and
fresh milk. And when I had filled myself full of it I betook me to
the seat under the old pine, and I gazed at the stars and wondered.
I saw Arcturus, hanging red, high in the west; and Altair blazing
above me. But, gaze where I would, I saw always that wonderful hair
with the light upon it from the western sky; and those wonderful eyes
with the light within them that made them to outshine Altair himself.
And, gazing, I wondered if in all the worlds that revolve about those
innumerable suns there were a being as happy and as content as I.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of all the gifts of the gods, happiness is the most elusive. For they
that most seek it find it not; and to them that seek it not, but go
calmly about their business, on a sudden it appears, saying: “Lo, here
am I.” And we must not then attempt to hold it fast, for ever it breaks
away and is gone--for a time--and naught is to do but wait, with what
patience we may, until it come again. And the more we have patience the
sooner will it come back.

So the days passed, and some days I found happiness, and other days I
found it not; but usually I had it for a bedfellow. And it was lucky
that I did, for what is to be said of a clammer who cannot sleep? And
each afternoon, when the sun was low, I wended slowly over toward my
clam beds along the shore where the water lapped ever. And the Great
Painter spread his colors with lavish hand, and peace covered the earth
and was upon the face of the waters. And peace was in my heart, too,
for there on the bank sat Eve, and she smiled to see me come.

And it befell on a day that there was a flat calm, and the sun veiled
his face before he set; and, above, the veil spread out in a thin
sheet, feathery and white, so that I could not tell where it began.

“Look, Eve,” I said. “To-morrow it will be stormy.”

And she said nothing, but only looked as she was bid, being content to
take my word in all things. But Old Goodwin was not.

“Indeed!” he said. “What makes you think so, Adam?”

Then I was tempted. I might have entered upon a disquisition concerning
cyclones and the sequence of the weather. But I put that temptation
from me. It was but a part of my past.

“Oh,” I answered simply, “the look of the sky.”

“And in what does the look of the sky differ from its look on any other
day?” he asked. “I see no difference.”

“It is hard to tell,” I said; “but this is the hurricane season. I may
be quite mistaken. But I think it will storm to-morrow.”

And so he was forced to be content, though he was but half convinced;
and he would have betaken him to the digging of clams, but the tide was
not half down. This he mourned, with frequent upward glances at the
sky. For Old Goodwin was become more skilled in the finding of clams
than he had been. Indeed, I marveled what he could do with the clams
he dug, for he no longer gave them to us. I mentioned it to Eve.

She laughed, whispering. “I fear, Adam,” she said, “that he is
contaminated. He sits up late at night, after everybody else is gone to
bed--and I met him yesterday coming from the kitchen. He looked furtive
as he smiled in passing. Yes, I fear that he is contaminated.”

“Steamed clams?” I whispered, in reply. “But steamed clams are not
baked clams. They are, to clams from a bake, what--a bath in a tub is
to a dip in that great ocean.”

“It is the best that he can do,” she said. “He may not have a clambake.
My mother”--

“Ah,” said I, illuminated, “the poor man! We will have one for him.
And we will ask your mother, too. She can but refuse, at the worst. And
perhaps”--

Eve shook her head. “She will refuse,” she said,--“or take no notice of
your asking. But father will be grateful. There are so few things the
rich may do simply. Father would like to muss around, himself,--to help
you with the bake, Adam,--and wear his old clothes. He generally has a
horrid time.”

She was smiling and eager, and her eyes shone. I nodded. “He shall have
his clambake.”

So Eve went in early, and Old Goodwin, for the sky was become all gray
and nothing to see. And to me there is nothing so dismal as a dull gray
sky when there is neither wind nor rain. There is the same gray light
on the water, the same wherever I look, and all nature seems waiting.
After a day of it, I am fit for battle and murder. But now a little
breeze came creeping in out of the east, chill and drear. And I was
wakened in the night by the wind, howling like a lost soul in torment.
I turned over and drew the covers closer and slept again.

And when the day broke, it was not tranquil, and no sun to see; and
the wind shrieking and yelling out of the southeast like some wild
thing, with gusts of drenching rain. I thought of my late corn, which
was heavy with great ears--and had been tall, too, the night before.
It was like to be blown flat in that wind--as flat as if it had been
harvested--and what was a clambake without fresh corn? But there was no
help for it. I ate my breakfast at my leisure,--there would be more
wind before there was less,--put on oilskins, boots, and sou’wester,
and fared forth.

As I passed down through my garden I glanced at my corn. It was flat,
as I expected, save one great stalk, stronger than its comrades, or
more deeply rooted, and that stalk waved and thrashed about in anguish.
It would break soon, I knew. And I mused as I leaned against the wind
upon its fate--how it must be broken and die, while the stalks less
well rooted did but go down before the blast, and live and grow. But
I gave my corn no more thought, for I was come to the steep path that
led me down along the shore, and by the water, now all brown with sand
and mud that had been stirred from the bottom. For, although it was
fairly quiet here, being in the lee of the bluff, the water was well
stirred, as any might guess from looking out upon it. And I came to
the bank, where the sod breaks off to the sand, and no Eve was there.
And, indeed, I had known better, but can a man help hoping? It was much
too early, and who could expect her to come down in that wind? And as
I made these excuses for her, behold, she stepped from behind a great
tree, and she laughed aloud to see my face.

“Oh, Adam!” she cried, “one would think, to see you as you came, that
you had lost your last friend, and were just come to the funeral.”

“And then,” I answered, smiling up at her,--“what then, Eve?”

“Why, then,--you seemed surprised and”-- With that she stopped, and
she stood upon the bank above, and I on the sand below; and she put her
hands upon my shoulders, one on each, and looked down into my face. And
I looked up into her eyes, and I forgot the storm, and I forgot that
wild wind that blew, and I forgot all things save what I saw there.
And, an instant, she bent to me. “Oh, Adam, Adam!” she cried, “I am
glad, glad that you care so much. For it is not easy for me.”

And I said no word, but only held her so for some while. And presently
she laughed, as if she were half ashamed, and drew her from my arms.
And I saw that her face was wet. It may have been the rain--I do not
know. A fisherman, in sou’wester and oilskins, holding in his arms a
Daughter of the Rich. I laughed aloud at the thought. For, though she,
too, had on boots, she seemed no fit mate for such as I--in her long
coat, that covered her from neck to heel, and with her wide felt hat,
tied down behind. Indeed, I grudged that to necessity--for her hair was
all hid, under the hat.

Out from my clam beds--some way out--is a reef of rocks. It is grim
enough in any weather: at low water just showing its rough head, dark
brown, barnacled, bearded with seaweed; at high tide, in calm weather,
nothing but a wide expanse of placid water. For which reason, the
government, in its wisdom, and to protect the lives of yachtsmen, who
ever walk in darkness--the fishermen know it from the beginning of
time--the government had set, upon the most outward rock a spindle.
It was awkward enough, that spindle, with its sprawling arms, like a
telegraph pole--but it served its purpose well in ordinary weather I
have no doubt. But now,--this was no ordinary weather, as any might
see,--it seemed like to go down, even as my solitary stalk of corn; to
be torn from its hold in the rock, or the shaft twisted and bent and
broken, till it served no longer.

“Look, Eve,” I shouted. For the gale tore my words out of my mouth.
“The spindle--it will go down at high tide--or before. See, it is bent,
already.”

For, as I spoke, a great sea smashed down upon the rock, sending its
spray high; and when the wind had blown the bits of broken water far
to leeward, leaving the rock in a smother of foam, I saw the spindle,
and it stood straight no longer. And I watched for the fellow of the
sea that had come. But Eve held her peace. And we two watched the rock,
with its leaning spindle, and ever it leaned the more, but it kept fast
hold on the rock, though it was nearly buried in the foam. And ever the
tide came higher, until it was buried in every sea that came. So it was
come to dinner time; and I felt a great hunger that gnawed within me.
For a clammer must eat, even as other men.

“Eve,” I said, “it is my dinner time, and I am hungry.”

“Oh, Adam,” she cried, “can you think about eating--with this to see? I
thought better of you.”

“Think none the worse of me,” I answered, “that when I am hungry I
would eat. For I am not one of your theorists who believe that when
a man is hungry he should go without. But I believe that hunger is a
sign from Heaven. God gave man hunger that he might know when to eat;
and thirst, that he might know when to drink. And so I do. I have
never found myself the worse for it, but the better. Hunger breeds an
evil temper, as you may see. Mark how much pleasanter I am when I have
dined.”

And she laughed at me. “And the spindle, Adam,” she said. “It may go
down, and you at dinner. And this storm--surely, it is worth staying
for.”

“The storm will increase,” I replied, “according to the lore of my
neighbors, until full tide. In such matters their lore is older than my
learning. As for the spindle, it will go or it will hold fast as it is
ordained for it. If it hold fast, well; and if it go down, why,--that
will be well enough, too. At least, I shall have dined. I wish that I
might ask you to dine with me, Eve. We shall have roast mutton, with
corn, and potatoes, and--whatever else the wind has left. And a steamed
pudding, after. It is not fashionable, but it will be good. My cook
makes excellent steamed puddings. And a dinner eaten alone--it is a
lonely meal.”

Again Eve laughed, then sighed. I know that she sighed, for I saw her;
I could not hear.

“I should love it, Adam,” she said, “but you know I may not.”

“Love what, Eve?” I asked. “The steamed pudding?”

“No doubt,” she answered, “for now that you have reminded me, I am
hungry, too. But you know that was not what I meant. I should love to
dine with you in your own house. But it will not be long--there will
not be many more lonely dinners”--

She hesitated and stopped. But I knew. “Let us count them,” I said.
“Let us see how many.”

And again the storm was forgot, and the great wind that blew. And so
she went in, and I tramped home, in the rain, along the shore. But my
dinner was too quickly eaten for a clammer, and I thanked a kind Heaven
that there were not many more such--there were far too many, but they
could be counted--there were less than a hundred. And having bolted my
dinner, which deserved better of me, I hurried back to the bank, and
there stood Eve, and she smiled to see me come along the shore.

“Eve,” I observed, “see now for what you are responsible. For, dining
alone, I did but bolt my dinner, for I would not miss a minute of your
company. And thereby I risked dyspepsia. And that is not the worst,
for the ills that follow hard upon it are these: melancholy and an
evil disposition; and backbiting and gossip, and, in short, all the
qualities which you see in my neighbors. And”--

But she was laughing. “Is that not enough?” she asked. “I would not
be responsible for more, and I promise to give you an hour for your
dinner--hereafter. You will have no need to hurry back, for I shall
not be here sooner. But this is an exception. We shall not have such
another storm, surely, in the next”-- Again she stopped. “Look, Adam,
can you see the spindle? Is it gone?”

I looked. The tide was risen now, so that only now and then, between
the great seas that came, could I catch a glimpse of it; and I saw that
it was bent almost even with the rock. It would be useless for its
purpose even if it held, and the tide that was coming would be very
high. Even now the waves lapped about my feet as I stood upon the sand,
and the seaweed washed against the bank, and it lacked an hour of high
tide. I feared for the pebbles, that they would no more shine in the
sun.

“I see it,” I said. “It is yet fast to the rock--as fast as any oyster.
But it is bent flat, so that it is no manner of use. It may as well go
as stay. The water covers it already, or it would, if it were smooth.”

And, indeed, the seas broke no longer over the rock, save an occasional
one, higher than the rest, and the trough lower. Such a sea did but
open an instant, to show the top, dark brown and barnacled, then closed
again, roaring, in a whirlpool of foam. And Eve said nothing, but only
looked. And as we stood looking, and the rain running off from our
clothes in streams, Old Goodwin came down to us, in oilskins and boots
and sou’wester. And he said nothing, either, which was not strange, for
he was not a man of words. And when he had been there some while, came
a mighty sea, and fell upon the rock. I shouted at the sight of that
sea; I could do no other. And when it was passed, the water opened
once more and there was but the shaft, bent and twisted.

“Gone!” I cried. And Eve looked at me with wide eyes, but Old Goodwin
only nodded.

So we three watched for some while, and at last the water was as smooth
over the rock as it was elsewhere. And that is not saying that it
was smooth at all--even on my clam beds, where it was, in a measure,
sheltered, the waves broke high, so that I feared for the bank; but the
great seas raced evenly over the rock, and it was as there was none
there, for no man could tell its place.

Then, on a sudden, the rain ceased and the wind increased, and it
seemed that the whole earth must be torn up by the roots. And up on the
hill I heard the crash of a tree, falling, and then another. And the
water was level with the bank, and the waves broke over my pebbles. Old
Goodwin turned at the sound of the trees, and said something, I know
not what. For the noise of the wind and the noise of the water was a
great noise, and swallowed up the sound of his voice. And he looked
once more out to sea, and there came that into his face that made me to
look, too.

Now there had been, a moment before, a veil of rain over the surface
of the sea that prevented our seeing more than a little way. But now
the veil was withdrawn, and I looked, and rubbed my eyes, and looked
again. For there came a yacht--a steam yacht, and she was steaming
her best, and with the wind nearly behind her she came at a great
pace. Now she was lost in a hollow, so that I saw no more than her
stack, belching smoke, and now she rose on a wave, so that I saw her
hull. What fool, thought I, would venture from a safe harbor in such
weather? If they had left port before this storm,--well, it is but a
poor skipper that knows the weather no better,--and they were not like
to have been a day’s steaming from some good harbor. And as I thought
these things, the yacht was come nearer, and I knew it, and I knew that
here was that certain rich man come to plague me. I even saw the man
himself, standing forward, and holding on by a stanchion. And as I saw
I marveled, for I had supposed the man a coward.

I turned to Eve. “Do you know”-- But I did not finish, for she nodded;
and her look was troubled. I hated that rich man with a mighty hate.
And while I still gazed into her eyes, I saw them open wide with horror.

“Oh, Adam,” she cried. “The spindle is gone, and they will go on the
rocks! See!”

I turned. They had come on swiftly--too swiftly--and now were headed
straight for the place where the rock lay hid; steaming headlong to
destruction. I hesitated--I say it to my shame, though a man is but a
man after all--I hesitated an instant; then Old Goodwin began to shout,
and I shouted, too, wading into the water up to my waist, and waving my
hands. For I would warn them farther off. And at our shouting, the man
did but get upon the rail, still holding by the stanchion, and lean far
out, and put his hand behind his ear. For the wind whipped the words
out of our mouths before they were well spoken, and they reached him
not at all. And the yacht was but a length from the rock. And the man
understood, though he could not hear, and he leaned yet farther out, to
call up to the captain; but the captain had understood, too, and she
was already turning. And as we looked and held our breath for fear, she
struck with a great shock and careened, and the great seas dashed high
and hid her for a moment. And when she rolled back again and I could
see, the man was gone.

Then Eve shrieked and I cursed, under my breath, and I hurried to
shore; and hastily I stripped off my coats and cast down my sou’wester
upon them as they lay, and tried to pull off my boots. But they were
filled full with water from my wading, and would not come. So I pulled
out my knife and ripped them down the side; for I was of no mind to be
weighted down with rubber boots. Then they came off easily enough, and
I rose and looked at Eve.

“Oh, Adam,” she cried, “can you swim--in that water?”

I looked out upon the water that was roaring and racing. A fish might
fail to swim on the top of that water, and be well excused for failing.
And I was no fish, though I could swim passing well.

“Yes,” I said.

“Then,” said Eve, “go, and God keep you!” And she kissed me, taking
no shame to herself that her father saw, and those on the yacht--they
had little leisure for observing--and some of my neighbors, who had
gathered near,--who had leisure.

And, with that kiss upon my lips, I could have gone to my death with
a light heart; indeed, I knew not but that I was going to it. So I
plunged in and swam, thinking as I went, with some bitterness, that
here was I, risking my life for a man who was come but to give me
trouble. Truly, I thought, he has begun well, and it will be no strange
matter if the beginning and the ending are the same. Then I was come to
an end of my shelter, and the wind tore at me, and the waves buffeted
me, so that I was forced to give all my thought to my swimming; and
that was well, too.

Now I have no purpose to give an account of my fool’s errand that I had
swum out upon, for thus should I be but a boaster and a braggart and
one marked out for destruction. But I found the man,--I do not well
know how,--and I brought him to shore, to Eve and Old Goodwin waiting
there; and I do not well know how I did that either. And there I left
him, to be cared for by those same neighbors of mine, and to recover or
not, as it happed him. But I turned to Eve before I went, and she was
crying softly.

“Oh, Adam, Adam,” she said; and with that she stopped and said no more,
for she could not speak. But she put her arms about me, all wet as I
was, and held me tight, and I heard her voice whispering, but I could
make out no words. And when she had made an end of her whispering, she
let me go.

“Now, Adam,” she said, “you are all wet, and you are all weary. Do you
go home and get off those wet clothes, and rest yourself. And when you
are all rested I will come and tell you how he is.”

So I went, and weary I must have been, for I thought not to marvel that
Eve should come to my house, and I gave no thought to the yacht, that
had been in evil case enough when I saw her last. And as I plodded
along the shore, it chanced that I glanced out upon the water. For the
wind was beginning to fall already. And the yacht was on the rock,
where she had struck, but she had swung clean around, so that her
bow was toward the seas, and she seemed like to slide off. And as I
looked, a boat put out from shore and pulled toward her. After all, my
neighbors have their good points.

And when I had got into dry clothes and had swallowed a draught of hot
tea I felt somewhat rested. So I went out and sat me down on the seat
under my pine. From that place I could see the west, and the clouds
were somewhat broken and driving fast, but no glimpse of the sun yet,
though he must be near his setting. And out upon the water lay the
yacht, at anchor in a spot that was sheltered, and she was well down by
the head. About her, like a flock of crows, were some small boats. And
I looked no more upon the yacht, but I gazed at the tree like a spire,
that should show against the sun’s disk as he set, and I thought with
bitterness on what I had done; and my thoughts were the thoughts of
Ahab. In the bitterness of my heart I spoke aloud.

“Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?”

And, even as I spoke, I heard behind me the light step that I knew and
loved, and there was Eve. And she sat upon the seat beside me.

I looked at her questioning. “Is it well?” I asked.

She smiled up at me. “It is well,” she answered; and my bitterness fell
from me as a garment, and I marveled that it was so.

And so we sat and saw the twilight fail, early, and the night fall.
And out upon the water, a light marked where the yacht lay at her
anchor, and the light bowed slowly, up and down; for there yet was a
swell coming in, although the wind had fallen. And peace fell upon my
spirit, and a great content.

       *       *       *       *       *

Under my great pine is a pleasant place for a man--or for a Daughter
of the Rich, as I make bold to guess--with a heart at ease. And for a
certain rich man it might, indeed, be pleasant under my pine,--I did
not know. But I was to find out, for a week had gone by since I hauled
him ashore like any drifting mess of seaweed, and with no more life in
him, as it seemed, than in the weed; his legs and his arms trailing in
the water. And, Eve asking it, I invited him to my clambake that I made
to pleasure Old Goodwin. From my seat against the tree he might look
out upon my clam beds. But it might well be that he would not care for
clam beds; for every Rich man is not an Old Goodwin. And he might see,
too, the place where he so nearly lost his life. And it might well be
that he would not care for that, either. But he should have the chance.
And, to make the tale complete, I had asked Mrs. Goodwin, too.

It was there, just without the shadow of the pine, that the hole was
scooped in the ground, and lined with great stones. Indeed, this was
already done; for had I not had a clambake there? And, that I might not
forget it--there was little danger of my forgetting--and, too, that
I might have other clambakes, I had left the hole as it was, and the
great stones. And on these stones I kindled a fire that roared high;
and when it had burned long and the stones were hot I raked the ashes
off. And Old Goodwin helped me, and he whistled as he worked. He was
no artist at the whistling, but yet it gave me pleasure to see him so
well pleased, so that I must needs join him in his whistling; and I am
no artist at it, either. But we were merry at our whistling, and we
made so great a racket with it that any one would have thought to hear
us, there was a flock of strange birds and it was springtime; instead
of which it was fall and the birds had left, except some robins and
some sparrows and the meadow-larks. And even they were silent. And
the terns had gone, too,--that always marks the change of season, for
me,--and the winter gulls had come to take their place.

And when, at last, we had the embers all raked off and the stones
clean, Old Goodwin leaned upon his rake and wiped his forehead. It was
hot there, so near the hot stones, and the fire just burned out. And he
began to laugh, for sheer pleasure and for the merriment that he might
hold in no longer; and, laughing, he could whistle no more.

“Adam,” he said, “do you know what it is that you are whistling?”

And I stopped long enough to answer. “No,” I said. “It does not matter.
Make a glad noise.”

And, with that, I began to sing; and I am only worse at singing than
I am at whistling. But what cared I? And Old Goodwin, as soon as he
could, for his laughter, joined me in singing. And he sang worse than
I. But we cared not at all,--our hearts were at ease,--and took our
forks and shook down upon the stones fresh seaweed from the pile, and
on the seaweed laid the clams that I had digged that morning. Then,
more seaweed; and the other things, according to their season, orderly,
in layers: the lobsters, and the fish, fresh caught, and the chicken,
not too fresh, and sweet potatoes and white, and the last of my corn
that had survived the storm. I had a fear that the ears might not be
well filled--but it was fresh and tender. And over all we piled the
weed and made a dome that smoked and steamed and filled the air with
incense.

Then, our work done, we sat there and looked out, and were silent. At
last Old Goodwin spoke, and he was looking at the smoking dome.

“Adam,” he said, “will there be another clambake after this?”

“I fear not,” I answered. “For it gets on toward winter, and it will
be too cold. But when summer comes again we may have many, we three.”

He looked at me and smiled. “I feared this was the last,” he said. “But
when summer comes again we will have many--God willing. You are good to
please an old man so. I thank you, Adam.”

Now that was nothing more than a figure of speech for him to call
himself an old man. For he was a very boy, and could whistle and sing
and dig clams and mess about, and youth was in his heart. And who,
having youth in his heart, can be rightly called old? Indeed, in point
of years, he was not old; for he was not turned sixty, as I should have
guessed. But he was again silent, gazing at the smoking dome of weed,
and I made no answer, but I gazed out over the water. And presently
Old Goodwin rose and went to garb himself, for he was dressed in his
clammer’s clothes, that were well stained with mud and with salt water
and with clams. And then I, too, would change my clothes, for I was no
better dressed than he.

And when I was all arrayed I set out along the shore, and my heart-beat
was too high, by far; but my spirits were high, too, so that I scarce
kept from singing aloud, or from waving my arms and shouting at the
deep-sounding sea. But I remembered that certain Rich man that I
was to meet. What would he think of a clammer that sang aloud, by
himself,--and most outrageously,--or that shouted an occasional line
from Homer--what could he think, but that I knew no better--and no
more? So I strode along the shore and came to the bank where the sod
broke off to the sand and the pebbles shone in the sun; for the storm
had spared them. And I sat not down, but paced to and fro. And soon
came Eve, and up leaped my heart into my throat and choked me; and
behind her came Old Goodwin and that other Rich man. A moment only Eve
smiled at me and then she stood aside. And that other Rich man stepped
forward and broke in upon Old Goodwin’s speech; for he would have
introduced us.

“We need no introduction,” he said. “Thanks seem a poor thing enough to
give in return for my life, but I can offer you no more.”

I took the hand he held out, and I murmured something, I know not
what, about its being of no consequence,--which, indeed, it was not,
though I should not have said so. And we looked each other up and
down, and either measured other. And what he thought of me I did not
know--nor care.

So we wended along the shore to the steep path, and Eve walked beside
me. She was not in white now, for it was cool, with a sharp wind out of
the northwest. Indeed, what she had on I did not know--some dark stuff
gown that well became her--I was not looking at her gown. No doubt I
was grinning like any idiot; but I did not hold her hand, for behind
us walked Old Goodwin and that Rich man--that Rich man that I would
have cast into the sea so short a time before. And, walking so, we came
to the steep path and climbed it, and we stood beneath my pine. And
before the seat against the tree stood my table that I had made large
enough for four; but the seat was unchanged, and it held but two.

Old Goodwin looked upon the seat, and he said no word, but he smiled
his quiet smile and betook him to my shed. I bethought me of the other
guest that I had asked.

“And Mrs. Goodwin?” I said. “Will she not come?” But I did but jest,
for I had had no idea that she would come.

And that Rich man spoke, and what he said was a surprise to me. “Mrs.
Goodwin wished me to say,” said he, “that she feared to catch cold as
the wind is somewhat biting. But she thanks you for asking her.”

Then I looked at Eve, and she seemed surprised, too. But Old Goodwin
had found his box that he had sat upon before, and he brought it out
and set it by the table.

“I will sit here,” he said. “I have an affection for this box. It tilts
nicely.”

And that other stared a moment. “I wonder,” he said at last, “if there
is another--no, no.” For I had started for the shed. “Let me get it.”

And I laughed and nodded, and he went. And we heard a tremendous
racket, and presently he came, bringing a box that was the fellow to
Old Goodwin’s. Laughing, too, he set it down.

“There!” he said. “And now for the clams.” He looked at me. “Is there a
fork for me? You must let me help.”

“Heaven forbid!” I said hastily. “You and Eve are the guests.”

And so Eve and he sat, while Old Goodwin helped me. And I took my
fork and opened the smoking dome, and together we set upon the table
corn and potatoes, both sweet and white, and a chicken and some fish
and the lobsters; and last of all a great pan of clams. And the rest,
upon the hot stones, I covered again with seaweed; but not deep, for
soon we should want more clams--and more fish and another chicken, for
here were three good men to eat them; and what three men can eat at a
clambake is nothing less than a marvel. Eve did her part, too. And Old
Goodwin, setting the things upon the table, was as pleased as Punch.
And as I pitched the weed, again I heard Eve laughing.

“Now, who would believe,” she said, “that had not seen,”--

But Old Goodwin interrupted her cheerily. “Not a bit too much--not half
enough,” he said.

So Eve and I sat side by side upon the bench, and the two Rich men sat
opposite, on their boxes. And no sound was heard save the noise of the
wind that whispered softly in the tree above, and the noise of the clam
shells as they struck upon the ground among their fellows that had gone
before. And if we spoke little or not at all, but only ate, we were
merry at our eating, which, as I have heard, wards off dyspepsia. For
dyspepsia abides not with them that are merry, but is mortally afraid
of a laugh. And those two Rich men got to tilting back and forth upon
their boxes--they had been too busy at the first--and, having eaten a
prodigious quantity of clams and all things else, they fell a-laughing
as they had been two boys; and they called for more clams. So I opened
the bake again, and, behold, there were no clams left, not one, so that
I marveled at it.

I must have looked blank with astonishment. “Now who would have
supposed,” said I, “that we could have eaten them all? For I thought
that I had had enough for six at least.”

At that Old Goodwin burst out laughing afresh. “If you could have seen
your face, Adam! But never mind. No doubt we have eaten more than is
good for us, as it is.”

“I am sure of that,” I observed. And the two Rich men, filled full of
lobster and corn and clams, did but laugh again, and they tilted upon
their boxes. And I was filled full, too, but with content more than
with clams, so that the wind that sighed in my pine sighed merrily.

We sat long at my little table under my great tree, but at last it was
cold, for the sun was gone behind a black cloud. And Old Goodwin rose,
reluctantly, and that other Rich man rose too, and his pocket that
had been toward Old Goodwin bulged. And when he emptied it there were
clam shells that Old Goodwin had deposited there. And he laughed--I
thought him good to laugh--I fear that, in his place, I should not have
laughed--and he chased Old Goodwin. And when he had caught him and had
filled his pocket with the shells, he came and stood before us, where
we yet sat upon the seat.

“I have to thank you,” he said to me, and his laugh was gone, “for the
pleasantest time and the most delicious feast that I have had in many
a long day.” Then he hesitated and looked away a moment; but presently
his eyes came back to mine. “You are a better man than I am, Adam, and
better worthy of her. From my heart I wish you joy. I shall not come
again to plague you.” Again he looked away. “And I shall say as much to
Mrs. Goodwin,--with your permission.”

And I stood, and took the hand he offered; but I did not speak. I could
not for a moment. Then I mumbled something, I know not what, about his
kindness. But it did not matter what I said. And my heart warmed to
him, and I was sorry for him--he had lost so much--but he took it as
a man should. I thought nothing of his having called me Adam; indeed,
I doubted if he knew it. And so he went, quickly, without so much as
looking back, and Old Goodwin followed him as quickly, and they went
down the steep path, and we heard their laughter. And I turned to Eve,
and she smiled up at me.

“Oh, Adam,” she cried, softly, “if we only could!”

“We can but try, Eve,” I answered, smiling back at her; “and we will.
He seems worth it.” And then I mused awhile, and at last I spoke my
thoughts. “Eve,” I said, “why did you choose me?”

She looked at me, her eyes wide. “Why did I choose you?” she asked,
perplexed. “What do you mean, Adam? Would you give me up?”

“Now, God forbid,” I cried, “that I should do that thing! What man,
having got you, would give you up? But that Rich man”--

She laughed, a merry laugh. “Why, that is simple--as simple as life
itself. I chose you because I loved you, and I did not love that Rich
man. And why it should be so I do not know.”

And what I did at that, I leave it to any to guess; for Old Goodwin was
gone and that other, and there was no one there save only Eve and me,
under my great tree.

“I thank Heaven that it is so,” I said, at last, “and what the reason
is I do not care.”

And, at that, the black cloud that was before the sun spilled a few
drops, great drops that splashed as they struck. For it was well over
us, and almost passed.

Eve was distressed. “Adam,” she said, “do you believe in signs?”

“Yes,” I answered, “if you like. Would you take that cloud to be a
sign?”

She nodded, saying nothing.

“Well,” said I, rising, “so be it. But come where we can see the east,
and I will interpret for you.”

So she rose, too, and together we went down the steep path and along
the shore. And as we went I interpreted for her in this wise.

“The shadow of that cloud, Eve, that seems so black, is the shadow of
a sorrow. And the cause is the behavior of your mother, who will have
none of me for a son-in-law,--who says that she will not come to your
wedding--if I am there. And the drops are your tears,--or hers; for I
do not doubt that she has shed many tears over this same matter. But
the cloud, although it is black, is not large and it is passed. Look,
Eve; you can see the sun.”

And as I spoke, the sun was peeping under the western edge, and we saw
his disk grow until we could look at him no longer. And we were come to
the bank, where the pebbles shone red in the sun. For he was near his
setting.

“Now,” said I, “I may have to wait some while for the rest of my
interpreting.”

And we waited, watching in silence, for some minutes. And the cloud was
gone from above us, into the east, and there were no more drops; but
under the cloud it was raining hard. And there began to form a bow:
first a patch of color here and a patch there; then, gradually, the
patches joined by fainter parts; then those faint parts brightened
into a perfect bow with its ends dipping into the sea, and with all its
colors perfect. And as we gazed there formed, within the first, another
bow, and yet a third--though one must look hard to find it.

“Indeed, Eve,” I said softly, “it needs no interpreter.”

And Eve smiled up at me. But the marvels were not yet done; for there
came broad sheaves of light that over-spread the bows, but did not
hide them. And there, at the centre of the bows, was a tiny sail; and
the sail was brighter than aught else, and it was as if the sheaves of
light had issued from it. And above were great masses of cloud, roll
upon roll, and the sun, in his setting, spread them with all manner of
saffron and scarlet and crimson, and with all the delicate shades of
pink that are known to man--and with many that man, with all his skill,
knows nothing of. But the shadows were blue or lilac or purple. And we
gazed long, until the brightness began to fade. Then Eve sighed, saying
nothing. The sun had dropped behind the western hills; and the twilight
faded swiftly, and the night was come.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a restlessness that seizes upon men in certain case. I had
felt it before, and had wandered the shores with my basket upon my arm
and my hoe in my hand; and I had digged here and there as the fancy
took me. But the clams that I digged lay forgotten upon the sands, to
bury themselves once more; while I, seated upon a barnacle-covered
rock--or even standing--gazed and gazed and saw nothing of what was
before me until the tide, lapping about my ankles, brought me to
myself. And then, with a heart-breaking sigh, I would shoulder my hoe
and again betake me to wandering the shores. Then Eve had been the
cause, for I had not got her; but at least I might find my content
again at sunset, when I sat upon the bank, where the sod breaks off
to the sand, with her beside me. Now, Eve was the cause, too, and my
content was fled from me; and though I might sit upon the bank, I
sat alone, or with no one but Old Goodwin. And Old Goodwin was well
enough, but he was not Eve. And I had no joy in the colors that the
Great Painter spread so lavishly, but was ill-tempered and out of
sorts, giving short answers to the remarks Old Goodwin made, and
never sitting still five minutes. And Old Goodwin but smiled his quiet
smile and was very patient with me; he knew well the cause of my sour
temper. For Eve had betaken herself to the city, that she might the
better make preparation for a certain Event. What Event that was, it is
but a dullard that cannot guess; and it was eighty days off, and then
it was seventy. Eighty æons--with Eve away. But I diverted myself by
counting it in hours, then in minutes. It was a prodigious number of
minutes--but I took what comfort I might in it.

Then, one morning, I awoke at dawn, and, as I leaned from my window, I
saw the ground all white with frost. Then the east was grown all red,
a narrow line of color changing to yellow and a faint green, and on a
sudden the sun popped up. And then I got to thinking of that other dawn
that Eve and I had seen, and content abode with me no longer. And I
drew in my head and dressed in sullen haste and went down to breakfast.
It was a good breakfast, but gall and wormwood had been sweeter in
my mouth if I could but find again that peace I sought; and, having
done, I lighted my pipe and went forth. Sighing, I betook me--not to
the shore--I had traveled that until I knew each pebble, and I had not
found content; but the woods were gorgeous--I betook me to the woods.
Perchance content had taken refuge there.

So all that day I wandered the wood, seeing the red of the dogwood
and of the sumach, the reds and yellows of the maples, and the yellow
leaves of the birches showing against the white trunks; and here and
there a clump of pine, their dark green the darker for the color with
which they were surrounded. But I found no beauty in any. Truly content
was not there; or, if it were, I found it not. And I saw the seed-pods
lifting on their dry stems, and the rotting logs and the dead leaves.
I sat me down on a log, and from my pocket I drew forth a bundle of
letters. They were Eve’s letters--and one for each day that she had
been gone from me--and I read them all through again--for the hundredth
time. When I was done the sun was on his downward journey, and I had
found some measure of peace--and I bethought me that it was almost time
for another letter. I seized my stick and hurried home.

And with days like this one, or, later, with days when I sat moping
before my fire, a book in my hand, my tale of days was coming to an
end. I had great fireplaces, fitting for the chimneys, and I would
gaze deep into the glowing heart of one of them, my book forgotten. I
thanked Heaven that I was alone. For I was no less than a fool. I knew
it well; but I had no power to do otherwise--the veriest lovesick boy
might give me points--and then would come the postman’s knock at the
door--I knew that knock, you may be sure, and, as it went clattering
through the house,--before its echoes had died away,--I was on my
feet, and running. And I would open to him, and he, with a knowing
smile, would hand me my letter, and make some foolish remark about
the weather. The weather, forsooth! What knew I about the weather? It
might be raining great guns, but for me the sun was shining--with that
letter. And so I made him some answer--which was as like to be wise as
foolish, for I doubt if he ever heard it clearly--I do not remember one
of those answers--and I shut the door before he was well turned about,
and I hurried back to my fire to read--but not my book.

So at last my tale of days was done, and Eve was come home. And I
awoke one morning to see a thin skimming of ice, crisp and crackling,
spread over every shallow pool, and it was well into November. And my
breakfast was ambrosia and nectar, being the same that had been gall
and wormwood before; for Eve was come. And if I did not eat much, why,
that lovesick boy that I have mentioned can tell you why it was. Then
having done, I hurried off, and on every shallow pool that was skimmed
with ice I slid. And the ice rose up before my feet, and broke into
a thousand pieces behind them; but I did not wet so much as the sole
of my shoe. And I hurried over to my clam beds; for there, I thought,
shall I find my lost content.

The sun lay warm upon the bank, where the pebbles shone in the sun, but
no Eve was there. And I paced to and fro, fuming with impatience, my
head down upon my breast. For I found not content, having been certain
that I should find it that had been lost to me for a month and more.
And as I paced the shore, to and fro, there came a light touch upon my
shoulder. I turned swiftly, and there was Eve, her eyes shining. And
I--but I know not what I did--and, if I knew, I would not tell.

“Eve, Eve,” I cried, my voice shaking, “you were gone so long!”

And she only smiled up at me, the same smile that I had seen so often
in my dreaming before my fire; and I knew that I had found again that
peace that had been so long lost. And what we did then is for my Eve
and me to remember; but presently we found ourselves sitting upon the
bank, and the ice was gone from the shore and the sun shone warm.

“And when shall I see,” I asked, “your finery? So long a visit should
accomplish much.”

She laughed, a merry laugh. “Shall a bride not be properly fitted
out?” she answered. And she said it softly, as if she were half
ashamed; and at that I kissed her,--I could not help it. Eve did not
chide me for it. “And you shall see all my finery--on Christmas day, or
any day after.”

Then I looked blank, I do not doubt, and she laughed again her merry
laugh. For Christmas day is to be our wedding day. But I had Eve. That
was enough--and she had promised that she would not go away again. And
we sat there, talking or silent, as the whim took us, until Eve was
cold.

So the days passed, and I was happy; and the leaves of the wood, that
had been red and yellow and bronze, turned to a dull brown and fell,
whirling; but the oaks kept theirs, and they rattled in each breeze.
And the ice formed on the shore, great jagged cakes that covered my
clam beds and the bank as well, so that we could not see the pebbles.
And though the sunsets came earlier with each day that passed, it was
become too cold to stay and see them. But the days of my waiting were
grown less and less, till there was but one left. Still, there was no
snow. And the morrow was Christmas day.

I was prowling the shores that morning, looking for Eve--as I ever
did when I was not with her. And as I made my way carefully among the
broken cakes of ice that the tide had left, I saw her coming down the
path under the trees. I hurried--and looked again--and, behold, it
was not Eve at all, but a lady clad in furs, and seeming proud and
haughty. And she came near the bank, and so did I.

“I wished to speak with you,” she said. And I bowed low. But what she
said next astonished me.

“You have robbed me of a daughter,” she said again, her head
high,--“and you a fisherman!”

Again I bowed low, saying nothing. What should I say to that? Had she
not been told? I had ado not to laugh--but I did not, only bowed. And
yet again she spoke.

“You have robbed me of a daughter,” she repeated; “but I will come to
your wedding--to my daughter’s wedding. I wished you to know that, so I
came to tell you.”

And I thought she would have wept, but she did not. For she was
proud--and now I realized where my Eve had got her beauty. But I had
found my tongue at last.

“I thank you, madam,” said I; “and I am grateful for so little. I
should be the more grateful for a little more--for Eve’s sake more than
for my own--I am not your enemy, come to rob you, and if you would”--

“You have robbed me of a daughter,” she broke in, and turned swiftly,
and was gone up the path, her head high. But I could hear her weeping,
though she tried to still it. And so I stood and watched her out of
sight among the trees.

I was telling Eve of it that afternoon. And the sun was low, though it
was early. Eve listened in silence, watching the sun.

“Let us stay and say good-night to him,” she said, at last.

“With all my heart,” I answered. “But let us walk, Eve. You will be the
warmer.”

And so she slipped her hand within my arm, and we walked to and fro
along the shore, and we watched the sun. And, on a sudden, I looked at
Eve, and her eyes were filled with tears. And I stopped short.

“What is it, Eve?” I asked.

“This is the last sunset, Adam,” she said softly, “that Eve Goodwin
will ever see.”

And the tears fell, and she was weeping. My heart stood still.

“And you are sorry, Eve?” I said; and I scarce knew my own voice.
“Would you draw back?”

“No, oh, no, Adam,” she cried. “Not that--I did not mean that. I do
not regret--anything. But--let me cry a little.”

“Cry to your heart’s content,” I said, and smiled upon her; for my
heart was going again--like a hammer.

And so she wept and smiled at once, and then she wept again. And
presently she was done, her heart eased. And the sun was sitting on the
western hills.

“See,” I said. “He has stopped his southern journey, and has started
back again.”

And Eve said nothing, but she clasped my fingers close in hers, and
we saw the sun spreading the still waters with all manner of reds
and purples and shimmering greens. And as the last thin line of red
vanished behind the hills, we saluted. And Eve murmured something, I
knew not what.

“Good-night, Adam,” she said.

“Good-night, Eve--for the last time,” I whispered in return.

And she fled up the path under the trees.

For to-morrow will be Christmas day; to-morrow the gates will open.




III

OLD GOODWIN’S WIFE




OLD GOODWIN’S WIFE


My friends like me well enough, as I have some reason to suppose; for
although I am as peculiar as I ever was, they no longer remonstrate
with me as they used to do. Perhaps they think that marriage has
cured me of all my queerness--the summer is not yet come to prove the
contrary. And I may be sure that, when it does come, I shall roam the
shores, as I ever did, and hunt the elusive clam, as I ever did; and
dig, or gaze, as ever; and whether the one or the other, depends upon
my fancy at the moment. But if I do as I was wont to do, I shall not
roam the shores alone. Eve will roam with me; and there will be two
clam hoes in my shed, and two pairs of rubber boots reposing in the
closet--when they are not in use, which is like to be seldom. And the
one pair will be large and clumsy, and well stained with much wading
through mud, while the other pair will be small and dainty--yes, even
dainty, though they be rubber boots--and--well--not overmuch stained,
though she wade even as I. Rubber boots--for clamming--cannot be kept
spotless, nor should they be, if they could. But there will be but the
one basket, to serve us both. I may be sure of this, I say; but they
think, forsooth, that I will have done with such foolishness--now that
I am married. Wherefore, they have given over their remonstrating.

But I note that I am more popular than I was. Some of them are always
to be found at my house--not the same ones, but one or mayhap two
will come in of an evening and sit before my fire. My fire goes not
out, ever, nor does it roar; but always there are coals in plenty, so
that the logs blaze gently and send out heat. I love it so, quiet and
peaceful, for it makes my content the greater--a roaring fire makes me
uneasy, even though I have confidence in my chimney. And my content
would be enough in any case, with a friend sitting on the one side, and
my wife sitting on the other; and I--but I sit in the deep shadow, to
watch Eve the better. I love to watch her, and I would not be watched;
for thus I can think my thoughts--and not be bothered with knowing that
I am showing them too plainly in my face. For I have not been married
long--not long enough to show my feelings plainly and not to care what
people think.

And if I cleave to candles--as a clammer should--what matter? Five of
them give a pretty light, and a candle is long enough for an evening,
even though it is winter. A short candle is as good as a clock--better,
I think--for serving notice when to go. My friends have learned that,
too; and when the candles have become no more than stumps, they are
wont to jump up hastily, say their good-nights and be gone. And as
I cover the fire, to save coals for the morning wherewith to kindle
it afresh, I bethink me of my mighty wood-pile out by my shed--it is
mighty even now, and the winter nearly gone--and I smile to myself, so
that I am smiling yet as I rise from my task. Eve, seeing that, smiles,
too, although she knows not what she is smiling at; but her smile is
ever ready--ready and waiting that it break forth, like the gentle
sunshine--and she holds her hand to me. And I, having taken it, blow
out the candles, and we mount the stairs together.

Yes, my friends like me well enough, as I have some reason to suppose;
but my neighbors do not, as I have also some reason to suppose. And
if I have no great love for them, the reason therefor is not far to
seek. For they ever have seemed to think me one to be laughed at and
made game of,--they knew no better, which I suppose I should have
remembered,--well knowing that they might make their petty jests with
impunity. And sometimes I have wondered whether it were not better to
answer fools according to their folly; but my witticisms they would not
comprehend, and I have held back from that, although the provocation
was often great enough. For they never let slip an opportunity--and
there were a plenty--of letting me hear their loud laughter as I passed
them by chance; or even making a jest of me in my hearing. So that it
has come to pass that I despise them; and I have withdrawn my foot
from my neighbor’s house, now these many years, for weary of him I am
already. But now I find these same neighbors are well like to become my
visitors, which would plague me mightily. And I marveled at it.

I was thinking upon this matter one evening, sitting by my fire. And,
for a wonder, no friend was there, but Eve sat by the fire, too, a
book in her hand and her sewing basket near. For Eve, not having been
brought up to sew,--save embroidery, if that be called sewing,--has
developed, suddenly, a great desire for it, so that she always has her
basket by her. But this evening, whereof I speak, she was not sewing,
nor reading either, though she had a book in her hand; but her hand lay
in her lap for the most part, and now and then I caught her glancing at
me; and when I did so catch her, she smiled at me. So I smiled, too,
and at last I leaned toward her.

“Eve,” I said, “why do you smile?”

And, at that, she did but smile the more. “Why should it be, Adam,”
she answered, “except that I am happy?”

And she leaned toward me, too, and our heads were very close, and it
happened that the book she had been holding slid from her lap and fell
upon the floor; which should have grieved me, for it was one of my
favorites and bound in full calf, with hand tooling around the edges.
But I scarcely noticed it. I reached forth my hand, and it met hers,
which was reaching out for mine; and I looked deep into her eyes--eyes
swimming in tenderness--eyes like-- No, I will not say it, for it has
been said too often--though there is some excuse for the poets. And
after some while I spoke.

“I am glad that you are happy,” I said; “and I am glad that there is
no one here to-night--except only us two.”

And Eve said nothing, but I knew that she was glad as well as I.

“There are times,” I continued, “when I could wish that my friends
were--less my friends. It is pleasant to have them--I am glad that they
like to come--but they might give us more than one evening a week to
spend together.”

Again Eve said nothing, but again she smiled; and, smiling, it chanced
that her eyes fell upon the book that was lying where it had fallen,
face downward, upon the floor.

“Oh, the poor book!” she cried; and stooped to pick it up. And I
stooped, too, so that we were near bumping our heads; which somewhat
delayed the rescue of the book. And, when it was done, it befell that
Eve’s hair was a bit rumpled and she had a pretty flush.

“Now, Adam,” said she, “you must tell me the matter that bothered you.
For I know well enough that it was not your friends.”

I looked at her in some amusement. “Why,” I answered, “that is true. I
marvel that you should have guessed it, although my marveling is not
so great as it was, for women have a way of getting at the meat of a
matter without being at the trouble of cracking the shell. Oh, I am
learning. And whom should I tell if not my wife?”

Eve laughed, a low laugh and sweet. “I am to be the sharer of your
sorrows,” she said, “hereafter. Remember that, Adam. And now out with
it.”

And I did out with it. “It is my neighbors that bother me,” I said.
“For I see plainly that they are well like to become my visitors; and
they like me not at all, nor ever did. I know no reason why they should
have had a change of heart. Certainly it is none of my doing.”

Eve did not answer this directly, but sat looking at me with a queer
smile, so that I grew restive under it.

“Adam,” she said, “do you believe that Solomon was a wise man?”

“I was brought up in that belief,” I observed, “but, notwithstanding, I
have my doubts.”

“Oh, you have your doubts?” she asked. “And why do you doubt his
wisdom?”

“For the best reason in the world,” I answered; and I laughed as I
spoke. “And I hold that I am wiser than he--as I have said before. For
he had seven hundred wives while I have one--but that one, Eve”--

But Eve had stopped my mouth. “Now, Adam,” she said, “I have missed
some pretty speech of yours--and I love your pretty speeches--but you
may make another for me when I am done. For I have a purpose. Did you
know that?”

“Yes,” I said. “I was sure that you had. You generally have a
purpose--which you invariably accomplish. So ask, and I will answer;
and if my answers are not what are expected of me it will be but my
misfortune. My intentions are of the best.”

And, at that, she laughed. “Well, then,” she said, “was not Solomon a
wise man?”

“He had that reputation,” I replied meekly; “and I believe that he has
it still--though it is a marvel to me that a dead man can have anything
in this world. Yes, I think there can be no doubt that he was the
wisest man in the world.”

“That will do--nicely, on the whole,” said Eve, having weighed my
answer carefully, “although it leaves something to be desired. Now,--do
you know what Solomon said about despising your neighbors?”

She was looking down--and trembling at her boldness, I made no
doubt--and so she did not see the look of grieved astonishment that
came into my face. I was silent for some while, trying to recall just
what Solomon did say about despising one’s neighbors. He said such a
vast number of things. And, at last, Eve looked up,--and I saw that
she had not been trembling at her boldness, for she was quite at her
ease, and smiling at me.

“Eve,” I said, and I tried to be severe--but failed lamentably, for I
smiled, too; and there is some excuse for me, for how could any one,
meeting that smile of hers, remember such a purpose? “Eve,” I said, “I
did not think it of you, that you would thus put your own husband to
shame. For I do remember, and would you imply that I am void of wisdom?
I have no doubt that I, myself, could write proverbs well enough”--

But Eve interrupted me. “Do you remember,” she asked, “the Welsh giant?”

Now what had the Welsh giant to do with it? “I was about to say,”
I continued, “when you interrupted me, that I had no doubt that I,
myself, could write proverbs,--quite passable proverbs,--if Solomon had
not covered the field completely, some thousands of years ago.”

And I looked at Eve--but she was leaning back in her chair, looking at
me and smiling still; and she made me no answer. So I resumed.

“Out of my own mouth,” I said, “have you convicted me. But there is yet
more, Eve. Do you remember what it is?”

And, on a sudden, she had left her chair and was on the arm of mine;
and when she had made an end of rumpling my hair, she spoke.

“So you think, Adam,” she said, “that you have proved yourself a man of
understanding? Well, then, perhaps you have. But you may have these
same neighbors to visit with you, for I find much good in them. And
now,” she added, with a blush that well became her, “I must sew.”

So again she sat her in her chair and she took her basket from the
table; and, with another glance at me--a glance half shy and wholly
sweet--she drew forth, from some secret place, her sewing. And I sat
watching her, a tender smile upon my face--or what passed for that--Eve
seemed to like it--and I thought my thoughts. They were pleasant
thoughts. And Eve’s sewing--it was as if she were dressing a doll. As
I watched her fingers moving skillfully, but with no haste, I marveled
that she sewed so well; and as I watched her face I marveled yet again.
For her face was filled with love--a love that was not for me--filled
with love and a great yearning. And all that love she seemed to sew
into the little thing within her hands. But ever she had more, that
each stitch was done with it and yet it grew with every stitch she
took. And again Eve glanced up at me. I did but smile the more, until I
grinned like any Cheshire cat.

“Eve,” I said, “how do you know that they will fit”--I considered, and
saw nothing else for it--“how do you know that they will fit it?”

But I was wrong. “_It!_” she cried. “_It!_ Adam, I take shame to myself
that you would so call your first-born. _Him_, sir. I am sure of it.”
She put her sewing down, tenderly, and came to me. And her arms were
around my neck and her face was hidden on my shoulder. “Adam, Adam,”
she whispered, “my love for him is become so big, it hurts. How can I
bear to wait all the long months until I see him--my son? How can I,
Adam?”

And I--what could I do--or say? What but comfort her as best I might?
And God knows I had the best will in the world to it, but the fashion
of it was poor enough.

“In the fullness of time, Eve,” I whispered. “In the fullness of time.”

But she seemed to take some comfort from my words--or mayhap the
intent. So she lay as she was, but in some while she went back to her
sewing again. She held it up, for me to see; and I could but wonder
that any piece of humanity should be such a morsel as to go into that
garment. I said as much. But Eve only smiled and fell to sewing--her
eyes very bright.

As Eve sewed, I fell to musing on what she said about my neighbors. For
she was right, as she was ever, and I had not seen the good that was
in them--I had not been at the pains to see it, though I knew it was
there; and I had flattered myself that I had held my peace, and thereby
had proved me a man of understanding. And I saw plainly--I might as
well have stood upon the corner of the street and cried aloud unto
Heaven, giving thanks that I was not as other men--until the bubble of
my conceit had been pricked by Eve--and how gently! And presently the
candles were burned low, and Eve, glancing at them, put her sewing by,
and I knew that the time was come for me to cover the fire.

That done, I took the hand that Eve held out and I blew out the
candles, and I was moved to kiss the hand I held.

“For you have shown me, Eve,” I said, “that I have been in the wrong. I
will not withhold good from them to whom it is due. And I bless God for
my wife.”

For I felt very humble. And what answer I got to that I shall not tell;
but it satisfied me, and we mounted the stairs together.

I opened my window wide. There was the steady drip of melting snow, and
the air held a hint of spring, but the stars were bright. And, gazing
at them, I thought upon my son that was to be--or haply a daughter, it
mattered not which--and I remembered the time when I first knew it.
There had been the start of surprise, the impulse at rejoicing--then
the dread of it--the fear for Eve. And she had seen them all. She hung
upon my neck, weeping with the joy of it.

“Never fear for me, dear,” she cried, “never fear for me. But rejoice
exceedingly.”

And so I did. And I gazed at a faint star--a little one, just showing
to the naked eye--and as I gazed, I thought that I saw the eyes of my
son looking at me with an infinite knowledge and compassion--and an
infinite love. And as I gazed, behold, the eyes were the eyes of Eve.
And if my son shall have the spirit that his mother has I shall be well
content. So thinking, I turned from the window and got me into bed;
and having drawn the covers close, I slept.

       *       *       *       *       *

One may guess that my friends did not desert me--so long as Eve was
there; and she was like to be there long. For if it had not been well
with Eve, this story had never been written. There is grief enough
in the world without my adding to the sum of it--and I doubt much if
I should have the heart to write it down. So I kept my friends, and
they came as they had been wont and sat them by my fire; but I noted
that they sat not still, but they were apt to rise and stroll about
the room, and then they sat only to rise again. For the season got on
towards spring; and spring ever breeds a restless fire in the bones
of man that grows and glows until he can get him out-of-doors again.
Then he finds that peace that seemed like to escape him. I doubted if
my friends knew what ailed them--even knew that they were restless;
but I knew well. And I advised with them and counseled that they turn
their thoughts to gardening--and their restless bodies, too. For a man
must needs do his digging for himself. What is a hired gardener but an
abomination? Let a man dig, if he would find peace. It has taken refuge
in the earth; and he that seeks shall find it.

So I watched the snow melt on my garden and the ground soften; and it
was come to the first week in April. But the ground was too wet for
working--I tried it, every day, with my hoe, and the earth clung to the
hoe; for it was but mud, and the frost went deep. But at last came
a day when the earth clung no longer, but came away and left the hoe
clean. And I knew that the spring had come. And, having made the test,
I hurried to the house.

“Eve,” I shouted--I must needs shout, with the spring rioting in my
veins. “Eve, the spring is here!”

And Eve laughed--and came out a door at my elbow. “Why do you shout it
so, Adam? Have I not known it this last month? For the song sparrows
came long since, and the bluebirds, and it is weeks since I saw the
first robin. And now the birds are coming fast. Why shout it? As well
come in and shout that the sun is shining.”

“Truly that would be well done, too,” I answered, “for the sun shines
as it has not shone these many months. And a song sparrow does not
make a spring,--he comes while it is yet winter, and so do the
bluebirds. And I must dig, Eve, or I shall burst.” And, with that, I
seized her about the waist and whirled her until we both were dizzy;
and, with a kiss, I released her, and she leaned against the door,
laughing again.

There she leaned until she had got back her breath. “I suppose you will
have me to see your digging,” she said then, “and there is no help for
it.” But she smiled as she spoke, that I knew she was minded to it as
well as I. “Well, then, I will get my things on, and come.”

So I had what I wanted, and I betook me to my digging. And soon came
Eve, in her coat; for she did no digging, and the air held some faint
chill, though the sun shone warm. And, with our digging and our
planning, we were busy for some while; but at last I straightened up,
and there was Judson, leaning upon his fence and watching us.

Now Judson lives next me, on the side where lies my garden, so that
he may have a good view of it whenever he will; but never before have
I found him watching me. And although he and I have been next door
neighbors these many years, never have I exchanged a dozen words with
him. Not that I had any fault to find with him--he is an old man now,
spending long days in his garden, grubbing the weeds or pottering
about--it is a brave weed that will sprout in his garden, but he can
always hoe and dig--not that I could find any fault with Judson, but
I classed him with those others, with whom I held no communion; and,
after all, they, too--well,--I doubt if I care to learn their opinion
of me. For Judson was born where he lives--and the others, likewise,
for the most part--while I have held my land a scant ten years; and he
has held his peace, though he might well think me but an interloper.
He has more wisdom than I, and it grows with his years. And again I
was glad of my wife, that she had opened my eyes. And, thinking such
thoughts as these, I hailed him standing there.

“Good morning, Mr. Judson,” I called to him. “It is a fine spring
morning.”

He did but smile and wave his hand for greeting. And I heard Eve’s
voice beside me. “Adam,” she said, and in her voice was wonder at what
she had noted, “Mr. Judson is very deaf. Did you not know it?”

I took shame to myself that I did not know it--much shame; for here was
I that had been his neighbor so long, and the thing about him that was
most obvious I had not observed. I marveled somewhat that Eve should
know it.

“Eve,” I answered, “I am ashamed. Come, let us talk with him.”

“With all my heart,” she said; “for he is a good man, Adam, and a wise,
and--and”--

I laughed. “And it will do me good,” I finished for her. “Why hesitate,
Eve? For you are beyond me in wisdom, and so is Judson, I do not doubt.
Why hesitate?”

And she, uncertain whether to laugh or not, looked up at me to see.
For my conversion was but recent, and I was yet somewhat sore with
it. But, having looked at me, she smiled and slipped her hand within
my arm--which soothed my ruffled temper to a marvel, and I smiled
down at her. And so we were come to the wall--the fence was a stone
fence--where stood Judson, smiling, too.

Once there, we talked long of things appropriate to the season; of what
to plant, and when, and peas and beans and what not; and he wondered
that I had no rhubarb and no asparagus--grass, he called it. So I asked
him over the wall--for the first time in ten years--and he came, most
willing; and we wandered about my garden, discussing, and finally we
sat us down on a bench, that was before my shed, in the sun. Then Eve,
noting the pipe that he held in his worn fingers, bade him fill and
light it. Which he did, with some apology, but to his great content.
And there we sat, basking, until, at last, Judson arose, excusing
himself for staying so long. Eve asked him to come again, often.

“And,” she said, “I would like it much if I might run in to see Mrs.
Judson.”

The old man was pleased at that. “So do,” he said; “so do. She’ll be
glad to see ye.”

And we watched his bent figure crossing the garden; and, having got
over the wall again, and on his own side, he paused a moment to wave
his hand and to smile at us as we still sat. I felt a glow at my heart
that warmed it mightily, even as the sun warmed my body. It was worth
while being friends with Judson--and that I might have been ten years
ago had I but known. But a fool in his folly--

“Eve,” I said, “again I have to thank you. But you should have appeared
to me ten years ago. Where were you, Eve?”

“I was but a child, Adam,” she replied, “or scarcely more.” And as she
spoke she smiled at me and sat closer; for she well knew that I was
sore hurt in my self-esteem. She well knew, too, how to heal the hurt
so that it leave but a scar--for she would not have me forget again.

And presently she drew a letter from the pocket of her coat. “See,” she
said. “I have a letter from my father. They will come down soon--in two
weeks. It is a full month before their time.”

I drew the letter forth. It was characteristic of Old Goodwin--only
two lines, in his rapid writing, telling of their coming, and sending
love to her and Adam. Eve had had a letter like this one--about as
long--twice a month; he had no time for writing more. I had seen them
all; and I had noted what was missing--missing from them all.

“No word from your mother, Eve?”

She glanced up at me. “Not yet,” she said. “But I have no fear, Adam.
She is proud and she is stubborn--but they come a month early. No, I
have no fear.”

And I looked out to my pine, where the hole was scooped in the ground
and the seat was builded against the tree. The hole was filled
full with dried leaves and other rubbish, and the seat needed some
repairing.

“It behooves me to see to my oven,” I said, “for as it seems to me, we
are like to have a clambake soon. And I have a mind to ask Judson--and
his wife.” Eve beamed at me for that. “And I may have to get some new
stones.”

Eve slipped her hand within my arm. “Do the stones grow cold, Adam?”
she asked, softly.

And that made me to remember. I stooped and kissed her. “Truly,” I
answered, “the stones have been passing cold and now they grow warm
again. But it does not matter about the stones, for we have kept the
fire warm upon the hearth--and in our hearts, Eve. And it behooves
me to look at my clam beds, too. We may watch the sunset if you
will--watch it from the bank.”

She rejoiced at that. “With all my heart, Adam.”

So it befell that we wended, that afternoon, over to our clam beds,
along the shore where the water lapped ever. And, as it chanced, the
tide was low and would yet be lower; for it was a spring tide. And we
walked hand in hand--for there was nobody about--and what if there
were? Shall a man not hold his wife’s hand, in going along the shore?
And shall he not kiss her if he will--and if she will? Though in such
matters we should, no doubt, bow to convention. And, as we went, the
Great Painter spread his colors as he was wont to do, and the still
waters were covered with all manner of reds and purples. We saw our
flats just awash and now and then there broke upon them a wave that
ran across in ripples of color, and left the wet sand shining in a coat
of shimmering green. For, though the water was calm, the waves yet
broke upon the sands. It was a day of promise now well nigh come to
an end but yet it held a promise of other days. And such a day maketh
the soul of a man to rejoice--if he be in truth a man, and not a mere
beast of burden--it maketh the soul of him to rejoice within him and
his heart to sing; and of such as rejoice not in such a day, there is
little hope.

And Eve and I came to the bank, where the pebbles shone in the
sun--save some few that had been washed out in the storms of winter.
Eve cried out at that, and set herself to find others, that she make
the names whole again. And I looked up at our path, that still showed
bravely--with little piles of snow in the deeply shaded spots, the
remnants of great drifts--but they were going fast. And the grass
showed green on the slope--the tender green of spring. Seeing all this,
I sighed and turned me from it to our clam beds.

They were well uncovered by this, and I took my hoe and pottered about
and slopped here and there, digging where I would. And now and again
I made me straight--for some months past I had not bent my back so
steadily--and gazed at the changing colors or at the old sun, which was
drawing near to the western hills; then I bent my back again. And the
clams that I found I did but restore with care, to bury themselves once
more--we had no basket, not wanting clams as yet--and I found many.
They seemed good thriving clams, big and lusty, and none the worse for
the winter.

At last I was done with my digging and I straightened up and looked
for Eve; and there she was, beyond me, in the water, with her skirts
tucked up, and she was paddling like any schoolgirl. And the sun shone
through the wisps of hair--they straggled, ever, those wisps, and sadly
bothered her with their wanderings--the sun shone through the wandering
locks and made an aureole about her head. But now she minded them not.
And so I gazed long at her, and I saw the colors that she stirred with
her paddling, and I saw her standing in their midst. At last she looked
up at me.

“Oh, Adam,” she cried, “I am having such a beautiful time. Stop your
digging and come out here with me--and paddle. It is great fun. See, I
can almost catch that streak of gold! Oh, now it is gone.”

“Truly, Eve,” I said, “I am amazed at you. But I will come--and
paddle--although that is what I never thought that I should come to;
for I am done with my digging. And soon we must go in, for the sun is
almost set. It is not yet summer.”

Then Eve laughed, and I went and stood beside her, and we paddled
nobly--until I was laughing, too. And the sun set--he had already
passed the tree that was like a spire--I saw it for a moment against
his southern edge as he coasted down the slope--and we bade him
good-night together, as we had been wont to do. Eve turned to me.

“I am cold, Adam,” she said. “I confess it.”

Indeed, that water was passing cold, for there were in it all the
melting snows of winter. And so we raced along the shore in our rubber
boots--Eve’s are less of a burden than mine, so that I was beaten in
the race--and climbed the steep path; and in the house our fire burned
upon the hearth.

As I sat there before the fire, musing upon many things--with my back
feeling tired and comfortable among the cushions--I heard a robin
calling sleepily from my pine. It sent a glow through me. Verily,
Spring is here.

       *       *       *       *       *

So the season grew and filled me with joy. And as evening came, I sat
before my fire, but I withdrew somewhat from its heat; and I had no
interest in the book that I took up, but I must needs lay it down in my
lap. For, first, I found myself reading but words and getting no sense
from them, that I knew not whether I had read a passage or no. And I
would struggle awake and read a line, or mayhap two, and make sense
of it; and then I read the same line again, as like as not, and knew
not where I was nor what my author would be at. Then I would let the
book fall into my lap and care not for my author nor for aught else,
and suck at my pipe--it was as like to be out as burning--and doze and
dream. And Eve would glance at me and smile and go on with the making
of doll’s clothes. For I had been out all day in my garden--with Judson
giving me counsel, if I asked it--never, if I did not; and it was
borne in upon me that he that withholdeth advice, if it be unasked, is
a wise man--I had been all day in the garden, hoeing and digging and
planting. When Judson did his planting was a mystery--probably about
daylight; but he had got in the way of coming over the wall, and I
would no sooner be at work than there would appear Judson at the wall,
waving his hand in greeting. I think I shall make a gate there if he
does not object. It is hard for an old man to climb walls.

And I wondered at the apparent defection of my friends; for they came
seldom, so that Eve made some progress with her doll’s wardrobe. I
wondered, I say, until I reflected upon the advice I had given them,
myself. No doubt they were busy as well as I; and if they made gardens
they went to bed early.

So it was come to be the first of May and all my planting was done
except my corn. The birds had become noisy--they sang as though they
would split their throats; and, as I planted, I heard the shrill
whistle of the meadow-larks--but I could not stop to enjoy it. Only at
evening I sat me on my seat under the great pine, with Eve beside me,
and drank my fill of music. And the leaves were coming out upon the
trees.

I marveled somewhat that Eve had had no word more from her father;
but I must plant my corn. And my first planting of corn was done; and
as I straightened up from it, sighing with weariness, I heard a low
chuckling laugh. I turned quickly, and behold, there was Old Goodwin
watching me; and beside him Eve. He was still laughing.

I hurried across my garden, the earth sticking to my boots; and made
some apologies for my hands. The hands of a delver in the earth are not
fit for contact with the Rich.

But what did Old Goodwin care for that? “It is clean dirt, Adam,”
said he, “and honest. The hands that I have to take every day, they
are--well--it turns me nearly sick at times, to take them--though they
are white enough, and soft.” He looked out over my garden, that showed
already unbroken rows of green, where the early peas had come through
the earth. “So your planting is all done?” he asked. “I am sorry, for I
had hoped to have a hand in it.”

“And so you may,” I answered, “if you will. There are yet some
plantings of corn to be put in--but nothing for two weeks.” I
hesitated, and blundered on. “And Mrs. Goodwin--she is well?”

“Quite well,” he said, and smiled as he spoke--and so did Eve. “Yes,
she is quite well. She came down too. You may get a glimpse of her now
and then, I think, about the grounds, for she is restless this spring,
and out more than she has been used to be. No doubt,” he added, “it is
the weather.”

“No doubt,” I said; but I knew not how to take it, and I glanced at Eve
to see. “Yes, no doubt it is the weather.”

Then I went in, for I would change my boots. And Old Goodwin wandered,
that meanwhile, about my place with Eve beside him. When I came again
I found him on the seat under the pine; and he was gazing at the
stones, and then off over my clam beds, where the water danced in the
sun and the little waves broke upon the sands. But Eve was not there. I
marveled somewhat at it.

“She is gone to see her mother,” he said, answering the thought
unspoken. “She will be back presently. And how are the clams, Adam?”

I laughed, it was so exactly what I expected of him. “Pretty well, I
thank you,” I replied; “or they were, two weeks ago. I have not seen
them lately, for I have been busy. You may dig whenever you will. They
thrive, I think.”

He smiled again--his thanks. “And the stones--you have put some fresh
ones in, I see--they are all ready?”

“They are all ready,” I answered, “and the weed lies in heaps along the
shore. But I find that my appetite for baked clams is not yet ripe”--

But he interrupted. “Ah, Adam,” he said, “but you have this with you
all the year.” He waved his hand about. “That is much to be thankful
for. But I--the memory of those baked clams is all that has carried me
over many a hard place. For I realize--sometimes--that I am an old man;
but when I am here”--

“You are not,” I finished for him. “And that is reason enough for
staying. You have a roof over your head--such as it is--and a crust of
bread--with a chop or two when there is need. No man, however poor, can
ask more--and no man, however rich, can get more. So I foretell”--

Old Goodwin was roaring with laughter. “Yes,” he said, as soon as he
could speak, “I have a roof over my head--such as it is--and the tiles
upon it may last through a winter; and I shall have--no doubt--a crust
of bread--with a chop or two when there is need. And so you would have
me give up my house in town. Well, well, there is something to be said
for it. We shall see. We shall see.”

“Your house in town would be but a burden,” I said then. “No man can
live in two houses--two at once--having but one body. And you might
well give up--it is time to retire, having enough of means. And these
fields and this water and the woods are a never-ending delight. You
need not fear your nerves. For look at me. Am I nervous? And I have
retired--retired these many years--retired before my career was well
begun. I find amusement--and I am like to live long. And you should
know Judson--you must know him. He has lived long and will yet live
some while. He should have been here this morning.”

Old Goodwin looked at me, questioning. “Your neighbor?” he asked. “I
should like it much. But I thought you did not care for neighbors,
Adam.”

I was ashamed. “I did not,” I answered, “but Eve has shown me--I was
wrong.” Old Goodwin smiled at that, his quiet smile of peace. And I
went on. “But you”--

“I will consider,” he said; and I remembered me of a time when Eve had
said those very words. But she said more. There was “good fisherman” if
I remembered me aright. “I will consider the matter,” said Old Goodwin.
“And I must consult”--

“Ah!” I cried, “I had forgot.” And I smiled, more broadly than I meant
to; but it mattered not, for Old Goodwin was smiling too.

“There comes Eve,” he said. And indeed, I knew it well. Was I not
looking for her every minute that she was gone from me?

And that evening we sat before my fire, as we were wont to do, Eve
and I; but beside us sat Old Goodwin. It occurred to me to think that
Mrs. Goodwin was likely to be lonely--if she depended at all upon her
husband for company--and if he continued as he had begun. If it were
Eve and I, there would be a compromise--or a surrender--in short
order. But, I reflected, all married people are not as Eve and I; and
we have been married but a few months--although it will be the same
when the months are become years, I do believe. And Eve and her mother
are two very different persons. So, as we sat, Eve sewed upon her
doll’s dresses, unabashed; and Old Goodwin, if he noted it, and saw
upon what her fingers were busy, gave no sign of his surprise--it is
not easy to surprise him--but he seemed to find pleasure in the sight.
And, indeed, it was a pleasant sight to see Eve sewing there--pleasant
for a prospective father and for a prospective grandfather it was as
pleasant, as I judged. I doubt me much that Mrs. Goodwin sewed, ever,
of an evening; or ever had sewed, even when sewing was to be done
for Eve’s coming. The clothes that she had made for her baby were of
the finest and the softest and the richest no doubt--but she had them
made; and can even the finest and the softest and the richest, made
by the hand of another, mean as much as these, with love sewed under
every stitch of them? I do not think so. And the one thing she could
not evade if she would;--but she had but the one child, and I think
that was a sorrow to Old Goodwin. So we sat, and talked little or not
at all; and the candles burned low, that they were but stumps. Noting
that, Old Goodwin took his leave. And the evening and the morning were
the first day.

Then followed other days; and, first of all, Old Goodwin must
betake him to the digging of clams and I must help him at it. And,
having digged many clams, we must needs have a clambake, for I would
not destroy good clams to no purpose; but it was a sorry clambake,
lacking the corn and the sweet potatoes and the lobster. And, though I
sacrificed a chicken to it, the sacrifice went to my heart, for early
in May is no time to kill chickens. I asked Judson to our clambake, and
though he came, his appetite for clams was no more ripe than mine. But
Judson and Old Goodwin met and enjoyed the meeting mightily; and sat
upon their boxes and talked until I thought they would never have done.
So Eve and I left them there, sitting upon their boxes. And presently
they rose and wandered over into Judson’s place and I saw Old Goodwin
no more that day.

And, again, we went to the woods, and saw them breaking forth into
leaf. For the leafing of the woods is a little later than the leafing
of a tree which grows in the open. And I saw the seed-pods lifting on
their dry stems, but they were few and the pods were empty; for the
stems were brittle, that the weight of snow had broken them down, for
the most part, and the birds had gleaned the seeds. But the dead leaves
were fading into mould, out of which peeped a seedling, here and there;
and the rotting logs were fast being covered with a coat of green--moss
and the creeping vines were doing that. And I saw the birches, their
tiny leaves like so many little green spangles--or so they looked
until I came near. And the pines, too, had burst the buds, that every
tip was a lighter green, with clusters of little needles that, here
and there, still bore their caps of brown; but the oak buds were just
bursting.

I spoke to Old Goodwin. “There is much for a man to see here,” said I,
“when he is retired--even in winter.”

He laughed and made me no reply.

And, yet again, there grow before my house--but within my hedge--two
hawthorn trees. They are very mountains of trees, for hawthorns, and
their tops are above the eaves of my house. I would not miss the
time of blossoming of those two trees for aught; and one of them has
white blossoms and the other has pink. And the time came for them to
blossom, and so they did, for they are well behaved trees as any
could wish; and on the one side of my front walk was a mass of white
blossoms, and on the other side a mass of pink. Solid banks of blossoms
they were, with a green leaf showing through here and there, even to
the tips of the trees. I found Old Goodwin viewing them from the road.
And it was come to be the last week in May. And, though I found him
gazing at my trees--I have a pride in them, which may be pardoned--I
said not much.

“There is much for a man to see, here and there,” I said, “when he is
retired.”

And once more he laughed, but he made me a reply to this. “True enough,
Adam,” he answered, “true enough. There is enough for a man to
see--and I think there is enough for him to do.”

So June was come. It was in June that my appetite for clams was become
ripe; and we digged in my clam beds more than ever, and put some heart
into the digging. It was Old Goodwin and I that did the digging, for
the most part--he loved it--while Eve sat on the bank and watched us.
Sometimes she would dig, but more often she did but watch, cheering
us, the while, with observations; and, now and then, I would go and
sit beside her and leave Old Goodwin. But he did not mind--did not
appear to notice. Every evening, after supper, we came, Eve and I, to
the bank. And Old Goodwin joined us there and we stayed until the sun
was set and we had said our good-nights to him. And it befell, on an
evening that was thick with fog--it is apt to be a thick fog toward
the last of June--out at sea the fog lies all day, rolling in over the
land by the end of the afternoon--it befell, on this evening, that I
had been watching the fog. It sent its skirmishers ahead and covered
the shore, only to uncover it; for the skirmisher must move fast--and
it is not large, being but a skirmisher. And then would come another
and hide another piece of shore--haply my point with the pine upon
it; and I could see the top of the pine sticking up out of it, like a
sentinel. But always the main body of the fog followed fast after, dark
and dim and gray. And as it enveloped us at last, something--I know not
what it was--made me turn about; and there, in the path, up under the
trees, stood Eve’s mother. No doubt she thought she was safe there and
would not be seen. And I saw there, for a moment, a mighty pride that
struggled for its life, and grief and longing that were yet mightier.
Ghost-like I saw it--but I saw it. Then it, too, was blotted out. I
thought that I heard a faint cry in the fog.

And Eve turned toward me, startled. “What was that, Adam?” she asked.
“I thought I heard some one cry out.”

“In a fog, Eve,” I answered, “one hears many strange sounds.” Old
Goodwin turned and smiled at me, a smile of comprehension.

So June came to an end, and July was come. And, now and then, I came
again upon Mrs. Goodwin at our bank, and twice I found her on the
shore near the steep path that led up to my pine. But each time, she
swiftly turned, and fled so fast that I should have some trouble in
catching her, save in a foot-race. And that, I thought, seemed to lack
dignity. Racing along the beach after Mrs. Goodwin, as if she had been
some trespasser! I laughed--which was the wrong thing to do. For she
but went the faster as she heard my laugh--was well nigh running. Poor
lady! To be laughed at by her son-in-law! But I was not laughing at
her. I saw her shoulders shake as she were sobbing, and she put her
hands up quickly to her eyes.

The terns were come, long since. And, one morning, I was watching them,
lazily, from my bank. I was alone, that morning, lying stretched out on
the sand, my head against the bank; and I saw the terns, in regular
procession, flying swiftly down the wind, along the shore, and beating
slowly up against it. Now and then a tern would stop, and hover for an
instant; then again take up his slow beating, his beak pointing to the
water and moving restlessly from side to side. Or, if he dove, it was
too far for me to see whether his strike succeeded; for the fish that
they catch are very small and hard to see. But over my clam beds--just
before me--was a favored spot. Here, each tern hovered for some while,
and dove; dove once or twice or thrice, it might be,--until he had
succeeded in his fishing--then began, once more, his beat to windward.
For their fishing was successful, here; and, with a rapid flutter of
the wings, they gobbled their victim down, whole--and, I suppose,
alive. Poor little fish! Alive in a living tomb! And, as I thought
these thoughts, I heard a sound behind me, on the bank. I raised my
head--and there was Mrs. Goodwin. She was leaning against a tree--Eve’s
tree--and she was gazing at the terns, too, but mournfully. And, with
all her gazing, I doubt whether she saw aught of the sight that was
before her eyes.

Slowly, I got upon my feet, for I would not startle her. But she was
startled none the less. She showed it in her eyes as they met mine.

“Mrs. Goodwin,” I said softly, “Mrs. Goodwin”--

What more I would have said I do not know, for she broke in upon my
speech.

“You!” she said. “You!” And she said no more, but rose quickly; and
gathered her skirts about her and fled up the path and was gone from me.

I hesitated for a moment, gazing after her; then I sat me down again.
And I fell to musing and I watched the terns. They had scattered, with
screams of anger, as I rose, but were, by this, once more busied with
their fishing. What could I do? I doubted not that I had done the wrong
thing, rising up before her--but, it seemed, I had a talent for the
wrong thing--else aught that I might do would seem wrong--in her eyes.
Eve went to see her every day, but I--I sighed, and put the matter
from me. I had done my best--and would do my best, whatever befell.
And I saw the terns at their fishing, and I bethought me that I was
hungry, for it must be dinner time. I glanced up at the sun--I carry
no watch--what should a clammer do with a watch? And I saw that he had
passed the noon-point a half-hour since, and something more. It should
be nearly one o’clock. So I took my way homeward, along the shore.

So the summer passed. And we--Old Goodwin and Eve and I, with some
one of my friends or of my neighbors, as it chanced--scarce gave the
stones time to cool before we had them hot again. I had some fear that
my clam beds would give out. Mrs. Goodwin I saw as I had seen her; on
the shore or on the bank--but always at a distance--and she fled, ever,
at the sight of me. So I took no notice of her; and that seemed to be
the wrong thing, too. It did not matter what I did. And the summer
was come to an end--a happy summer for me, and for Old Goodwin, too, I
think--and I had had my fill of clams. It was October; and in my house
was a nurse, white-capped and white aproned--it gave me the horrors,
making my house seem a hospital--and she was waiting.

       *       *       *       *       *

Paternity has its responsibilities, so I am told by all who have the
good fortune to be fathers--and from those who have not, I hear no less
of it--more, perhaps. But, though I squared my shoulders, the load is
light as yet, so that they bear it passing well. For who could feel
the load heavy, for a mite that lies by his mother, as yet, and turns
to the world but a red and wrinkled face, serious and thoughtful and
unsmiling? For he has not yet smiled; and I doubt whether I am right in
calling his face thoughtful. He is bent upon two things; and to those
two things he directs all his attention, with a concentration that is
commendable. And no sooner is his hunger satisfied then he composes him
to sleep, graciously permitting Eve to hold his little red fist--if
it is quite comfortable for himself. He regards me with a grave
contemplation, on occasion, as if I were some unknown animal--which,
of course, I am--no doubt he would look upon a hippopotamus or upon a
bear with as little fear and as much affection--and, on occasion, he
gives way to his feelings and laments, loudly. Then I disappear, and
he stops crying, instantly. And I--I have not ventured to touch him
yet--I regard him with an awe which grows as I regard him. For here is
he--my son--that was not; and within these few days there has been born
a new soul. It is the one great mystery, and I marvel; but a mystery I
am content to leave it.

I remember well enough--it is not so long ago that I should forget
it--I remember well that night--I had waited since midnight--and the
morning that followed. I could not eat and I but paced to and fro,
still waiting. And at last came the nurse, smiling, and said that I
could soon go in to Eve.

So presently, after some further waiting, I went in. And there lay Eve,
very white but very happy; and she smiled to see me come. And, having
received my greeting, she turned back the covers and showed me my
son. Only for an instant I saw him, then he was covered again. I was
impelled to be respectful. But I must go, for Eve would rest her. Again
I kissed her, and again she smiled.

“I am so happy, Adam,” she said.

And I went down the stairs, and I nearly forgot my breakfast, in my
joy. But, having eaten hastily, I went out, my heart glad within me.
I took a turn up and down the yard, and paused under the pine to look
along the shore. There was Mrs. Goodwin, and she was almost at the
path. I waved my hat to her.

“You have a grandson, Mrs. Goodwin,” I called to her, “and Eve is doing
well.”

I know not what she did then--I did not care what she did; for I was
still waving my hat. Soon I should be shouting aloud. That would not
do, for Eve; and I hurried out at my gate and almost ran Old Goodwin
down.

“You have a grandson,” I cried, for the second time; “and Eve is doing
well.”

And he made no reply, but smiled and smiled; and I shook him by the
hand until he made a face and took his hand away and looked at it. And
I did but laugh and push by him.

“Go in,” I said, “go in. Eve is sleeping, and I--I must walk.”

So he went in, and I went on, down the road. At the next corner I met
Burdon; and, though I had not spoken to him for years--I have forgot
what was the cause of it--I rushed up and took him by the hand. He
seemed astonished, as well he might.

“Congratulate me,” I cried; “for I have a son.”

At that he grinned. “Mother doing well?” he asked. “I am glad--very
glad.” And he shook my hand with heartiness. I left him, looking after
me, and grinning still.

But I went on swiftly, until the houses were all behind me, and before
me were the woods and the everlasting hills. Yet a little while I
waited--until the woods had shut me in--then I could wait no longer. I
waved my hands and shouted to the echoing woods.

“Why hop ye so,” I cried, “ye high hills?” And the hills sent me back
my question again. And--well, I am glad that there was no one there
to see what I did--they would surely have thought me gone out of my
wits. And when I was, in a measure, quieted, I turned me about and went
soberly back again; though I was ready enough to laugh if there had
been any to laugh with me.

And now my son has grown apace, and no longer shows to the world a red
and wrinkled face, but one that is fair, with some pink color in his
cheeks, where it should be. And his hair--he has a quantity of hair,
which, as I understand, is not the habit of new-born infants--his hair
is not black, as it was at first, but shows yellow at the ends. Indeed,
I marveled somewhat at the blackness of his hair, for my hair is not
black, and certainly Eve’s is not. But, when I mentioned the matter,
the nurse did but smile at my ignorance and say that it would be light
enough in time. And my son has smiled at last--he does little else
now,--save when he is laughing. And I--I am become his slave, being no
longer a strange animal, and when he wills I bend my head and let him
twine his fingers in my hair and pull. He pulls well, and laughs the
while, and crows mightily with the joy of it.

And, now, though it is come to the last of November, the fall is kind
to us, and Eve walks beside the coach as the nurse wheels it. Where
they go when I am not with them I do not know--but I suspect. For Mrs.
Goodwin sent, every day, a maid to get the news of Eve. She would
not come herself, though she was near it twenty times, and had well
nigh set her foot to the steep path; but, always, her stubborn pride
prevented. But Old Goodwin is his grandson’s shadow. I shall yet be
jealous of him. And so it was come time that we speak of a certain
weighty matter.

“Eve,” said I, one day, “I suppose that you will have him christened.”
For whenever we say “him” we mean our son; and no doubt I should have
said baptized--I did not know about such things.

And Eve was smiling. “Yes,” she answered, “I should like it--and soon,
Adam, if we may.”

“And what is his name to be?” I asked. “For that is a trifle that must
be settled first, I suppose.”

“I suppose it must,” she said. “And I--what would you name him, Adam?”

“I had thought of giving him your father’s name,” I answered, “but”--
And I stammered and hesitated and grew red. But come it must. “That
rich man, Eve”--

She laughed aloud, with joy, I thought; and she seized me about the
neck and kissed me. “Oh,” she cried, “I _hoped_ you would. And I will
write to him, for he must be godfather.”

And so she did write to him, and he came--laden with peace-offerings.
And as I met him at my gate he took my hand and gripped it.

“Adam,” he said--and this time, too, I doubted if he knew what he
called me--but I did not care. “Adam, it was good of you to think of
me--it was kind.” His voice was not steady; but Eve was close behind
me, and he must say his greetings to her. So I did not find out whether
my voice was any steadier than his.

He spread his gifts before my son; and it befell that my son passed
them all by, with no more than a grunt of approval, until he came to
the silver cup. It was huge, more like a tankard than a cup, and Eve
and I had laughed at it as a gift for a baby--but let it pass--at
least it had no sharp corners. And when my son, in his inspection,
had come to that cup, he gave a crow of delight and grasped it by the
two handles, one on either side, and lifted it. I had not thought it
possible, for it was heavy; but he had his heart set upon it, and he
did it--and I was proud and let my pride show. And he managed to get
the cup well nigh over his face, and then he roared into it; and the
cup roared back at him again. He was astonished--he slipped the cup
aside to see how we took it--then, seeing us laughing, he laughed, too,
and roared again. Now he lies and plays by the hour with that cup,
roaring into it, and making all manner of queer noises, and listens to
it. And that Rich man sits beside him, and they play together.

Eve had the christening--or baptizing--in our little country church. I
had left the whole to her, to manage as she saw fit; and when, in the
church, I looked about, and saw those that she had bid to the feast,
I was somewhat surprised--until I remembered. There were Old Goodwin
and that Rich man, of course, and my friends; but there, too, were
Judson and Burdon and my other neighbors. And there was Mrs. Goodwin,
looking--but I did not look at her, after the first, so I know not
how she looked. And when it was all done, I lingered, for a reason of
my own, and walked with Judson, and Burdon walked with us. An old man
walks but slowly. So it came to pass that we were the last. And, having
entered my own house, I found Eve and Old Goodwin and that other Rich
man sitting in a half circle; and, at the centre of that circle, with
my son in her arms, sat Mrs. Goodwin.

I walked up to her quickly. “Mrs. Goodwin,” I said, “I rejoice that you
are here,--at last.”

So speaking, I held out my hand. And she took it, and would have
spoken, too, but she could not. She hid her face on the shoulder of him
that was but just baptized; and he, thinking, no doubt, that he had
had enough of water for one day, set up a wail. And I turned me about
and went forth and left them.




  The Riverside Press
  _Electrotyped and printed by H. O. Houghton & Co.
  Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A._




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CLAMMER ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
